I studied psychology on university and I found that the first study on mental imagery (Galton 1890) found like 1 out of a 100 scientist who reported zero mental images. That made me think it was pretty normal.

It seems that the standard definition of mental image has been reduced to having a state in the brain that can represent a thought.

https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-imagery/

But for me no thought every produces any sensation, I don't hear sounds or get any feedback from anything resembling a sensory modality.

I apologize if I talk like a space alien. But I can't even imagine why closing my eyes would help me to "imagine" or "picture" something.

To me the article looks like it was written by someone from another planet.

I can't imagine picturing myself or anyone riding a bicycle across the sky, and I can't imagine how it should be easy. It's not hard to remember things, or to plan things out.

I could concentrate hard or wait a long time, nothing ever appears that resembles an image. There are a lot of articles like this, in my opinion, I try not it bother me.

But if the author can't imagine someone being unable to do their "easy" experiment, it kind of makes me think that they are the one lacking imagination. 

I'm not to criticise it too harshly.

But it is pretty normal for people to equivocate mental visual imagery with imagination, thought, and memory, although it seems to me clearly not the case. I know lots of people who say they have something like a constant movie on their mind or a radio, although it is hard for me to believe.

But I don't need to taste food ahead or in my head or look at recipe book to cook.

I think I can play music and paint despite not hearing or seeing anything in my mind ahead of time, maybe I'll never be an expert musician but who knows.

Maybe I should feel bad for the people who read these articles who don't have a framework.

But I feel bad for the people who have mental imagery and audition, it seems like it would be extremely distracting. 

And it seems that there are a lot of thoughts that would be difficult to put into an image.