The Life and Thought of Giordano Bruno

In 1548, Giovanni Bruno and his wife, Fraulissa Savolino, saw the birth of their only child in a farmhouse near the small settlement of Nola, Italy. They named their boy Filippo. At age fourteen, lonely but precocious, Filippo traveled the thirty miles west to Naples, then the fifth largest city in the world. While little is known about what Filippo did do earn money in those early years in the big city, it is clear that he developed survival skills and spent a great deal of time reading, studying, training his memory, and thinking. By 1565, Bruno had entered into the monastery of San Domenico Maggiore, a center of resistance to Spanish rule, a conservative institution favored by nobility, and an excellent place from which to begin to link theological and political ideas. San Domenico taught Scholastic philosophy--the ideas of Aristotle as reconsidered by St. Thomas Aquinas and other scholars. It was a philosophy newly challenged by a revival of Plato's more poetic ideas about the world. Encountering Neoplatonism, Bruno began to develop his own, highly original, philosophy.

Evidence suggests that Bruno's non-conformist thinking was a concern to officials. Bruno removed from the walls of his cell at the monastery pictures of the Virgin Mary and other religious decorations, save a single crucifix. He read and made margin notes in Erasmus's proscribed book, "Paraphrases of the New Testament." (The book was discovered by officials in a latrine that Bruno used.) Privately, Bruno began to have doubts that Jesus was the Son of God incarnate in human flesh, a central teaching of the Catholic Church. Nonetheless, it was clear to all that Bruno was a brilliant student. Using "artificial memory" techniques first developed in Ancient Greece and Rome (techniques that link words or phrases to vivid images), Bruno developed the reputation as a man possessing a marvelous, almost unbelievable, memory. In 1569, Bruno was sent to Rome to perform feats of memory before Pope Pius V.

While in England, however, Bruno further developed ideas about the universe that marked him as an original thinker, ideas far beyond his Oxford lectures arguing that the Copernican system offered support for a version of Platonic theology. After leaving Oxford for London, Bruno published a dialogue, The Ash Wednesday Supper, in which he suggested a larger universe than Copernicus imagined, one with millions of inhabited planets circling millions of suns. In subsequent dialogues (over his lifetime, Bruno produced thirty works), he argued that awareness of a vast, inhabited, and infinitely old universe will (and should) transform human lives. Coupled with his views about the infinite universe, Bruno pushed his atomic theory, which held that everything was made up of identical particles (in Bruno's terminology, "seeds") in which God, with his informing love, resided. Thus, Bruno produced a new philosophy, outside the scope of previous Western thought, that brought together ideas about the unimaginably large and the unimaginably small, unified by a belief in an omnipresent, loving God.

