A Gravitational Ising Model for the Statistical Bias of 
Galaxies 
Andrew Repp∗†& Istv´ an Szapudi‡ 
Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawaii, 2680 Woodlawn Drive, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA 
Essay written for the Gravity Research Foundation 2019 Awards for Essays on Gravitation 
April 11, 2019 
Abstract 
Evaluation of gravitational theories by means of cosmological data suf f ers from the fact 
that galaxies are biased tracers of dark matter. Current bias models focus primarily on 
high-density regions, whereas low-density regions carry signif i cant amounts of information 
relevant to the constraint of dark energy and alternative gravity theories. Thus, proper 
treatment of both high and low densities is important for future surveys. Accordingly, 
we here present an interactionless Ising model for this bias, and we demonstrate that 
it exhibits a remarkably good i t to both Millennium Simulation and Sloan Digital Sky 
Survey data, at both density extremes.The quality of the i t indicates that galaxy 
formation is (to i rst order) an essentially local process determined by initial conditions. 
∗Corresponding author 
†repp@ifa.hawaii.edu 
‡szapudi@ifa.hawaii.edu 1 
arXiv:1904.05048v1 
[astro-ph.CO] 
10 
Apr 
2019 
1Introduction 
Newton’s deduction of the inverse square law from planetary orbits is perhaps the i rst use of 
astrophysics to constrain gravitational theories. Today we require a similar strategy: ΛCDM 
cosmology treats dark energy as a cosmological constant—one which our best theory overpre- 
dicts by 10120(Carroll 2001)—whereas modif i ed gravity mimics dark energy ef f ects through 
other means. Hence, one goal of the Euclid (Laureijs et al. 2011) and WFIRST (Green et al. 
2012) surveys is to shed light on such questions using cosmological data. 
These surveys, however, count galaxies rather than directly observing matter, and since 
galaxies are biased tracers of dark matter, the galaxy density is not proportional to the mat- 
ter density. Thus, extracting cosmological information requires modeling of the relationship 
between the matter overdensity δ = ρ/ρ − 1 and the galaxy overdensity δg= Ngal/N − 1 (ρ 
being matter density and Ngalthe galaxy counts in each three-dimensional survey pixel). The 
simplest bias models (e.g., Hof f mann et al. 2017) expand δglinearly (δg= bδ) or quadrat- 
ically (δg= b1δ + b2δ2/2), while a log bias (e.g., de la Torre and Peacock 2013) assumes 
ln(1 + δg) = bln(1 + δ). None of these phenomenological models perform particularly well 
compared to observations. Alternative approaches (e.g., halo models) are signif i cantly more 
complex, and simulations require simplif i cations (of unknown impact) to render tractable the 
required range of scales.

Another drawback to these approaches is their focus on high-density regions, despite voids’ 
signif i cant information content.In particular, low-density regions contain half of surveys’ 
information on dark energy, since they constitute 50 percent of the initial volume of the universe 
(see also Wolk et al. 2015); likewise, detection of modif i ed gravity screening requires analysis 
of both ends of the density spectrum. Hence, we desire a bias model that is accurate at both 
extremes. 
This essay presents such a model (Section 2). We demonstrate its accuracy compared to the 
Millennium Simulation and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey in Section 3; we conclude in Section 4. 
2An Interactionless Ising Model 
We begin with some physical assumptions. First, we assume the sites of galaxy formation are 
(to i rst order) determined by initial densities and local physics. Since ln(1 + δ) is a unitless 
quantity roughly characterizing the initial conditions (Neyrinck et al. 2009; Carron and Szapudi 
2013), we formulate our model in terms of A ≡ ln(1 + δ). Second, we assume we can treat the 
subhalos in which galaxies form as roughly identical. We also note that each subhalo is in one of 
two states—either hosting a galaxy or not—and that the release of gravitational energy during 
galaxy formation renders hosting energetically favorable.Third, we assume that clustered 
galaxies occupy deeper potential wells than isolated galaxies, rendering galaxy formation more 
favorable in survey cells of higher overall density. 
The Ising model nicely incorporates these assumptions. In this model, an atom has two 
possible states, one of which an external i eld renders energetically favorable; the model also 
2 
2024 
ln(1+δ) 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
M≡ 
? Ngal 
? /(1+δ) 
4h−1Mpc Mill Sim Catalog 
Ising Model 21012 
ln(1+δ) 
50 
75 
100 
125 
150 
175 
200 M≡ 
? Ngal 
? /(1+δ) 
16h−1Mpc 
Figure 1: Average number of galaxies per unit mass (M) as a function of ln(1 + δ), from 
Millennium Simulation galaxy catalogs (solid) and from i tting Equation 4 (dashed). The panels 
show two representative smoothing scales, namely, 4h−1Mpc (left-hand panel) and 16h−1Mpc 
(right-hand panel). 
typically allows interaction between neighboring atoms. Replacing the atoms with dark matter 
subhalos, we thus consider an interactionless Ising model, which gives (e.g., Pathria 1972) the 
following fraction of subhalos in a favorable (galaxy-hosting) state: 
fgal= 
1 2e 
βE sechβE = 
1 
1 + e−2βE 
,(1) 
where E is energy and β inverse temperature. After substituting a linear function of A for 
(unitless) βE, Equation 1 reduces to a Fermi-Dirac distribution: 
fgal= 
1 
1 + exp ?A−A 
t 
−T ?(T 
> 0).(2) 
Here Atmarks the transition value between empty and i lled subhalos. Note that subhalos 
in high-density cells i ll up i rst because “temperature” (−T in Equation 2) is negative for 
gravitational collapse.

The Fermi-Dirac formulation suggests additional analogies: for instance, galaxies arguably 
obey an exclusion principle, since at most one galaxy can occupy a given subhalo. Atalso 
corresponds to chemical potential, marking the density at which the next galaxy would form. 
Nevertheless, since galaxies cannot switch subhalos, we prefer to consider this model interac- 
tionless Ising rather than fermionic. 
We now make the following observations: i rst, we wish to describe the expected number of 
galaxies per survey cell as a function of the underlying dark matter density. We thus assume 
3 
that the expected number of subhalos in any pixel is proportional to the cell’s matter density 
(hNshiA∝ 1 + δ = eA). 
Thus we write 
fgal= hNgaliA 
hNshiA 
= hNgaliA 
bN(1 + δ) 
,(3) 
where N is the (global) mean number of galaxies per pixel. We can now write Equation 2 in 
terms of M, the expected number of galaxies per mass: 
M ≡ hNgaliA· (1 + δ)−1= 
bN 
1 + exp ?A 
t−A 
T ?(T 
> 0),(4) 
where, again, A ≡ ln(1 + δ). In high-density regions (A ? At), 
M approaches bN, so that 
hNgaliAapproaches 
bN(1 + δ): i.e., the number of galaxies is directly proportional to density. 
For low-density regions (A ? At), 
the number of galaxies drops exponentially to zero. 
Second, the matter power spectrum predominantly samples high-density regions, in which 
(1+δg) = hNgaliA/N 
= b(1+δ), so that δg∼ bδ, as in the linear bias model. Thus a linear bias 
represents high-density regions fairly well but (as noted before) discards essential information 
on dark energy and modif i ed gravity. 
Third, the various possible distributions of matter within a survey pixel produce a range of 
energetic favorabilities for cells of given (smoothed) density. The quantity T parametrizes this 
ef f ect of coarse-graining. On theoretical grounds we expect T2to be a decreasing function of log 
variance with a simple linear i t. Demonstrating this result is beyond the scope of this essay, 
but we here observe that a survey with larger pixels permits a greater variety of intrapixel 
matter distributions, and therefore T increases with the survey pixel scale. (Just as −T is 
analogous to temperature, the range of internal matter distributions is analogous to entropy.) 
For any given survey, however, T depends on the survey parameters as well as the type of 
galaxy under consideration. 
Fourth, the additional constraint provided by the total number of galaxies implies that this 
model has only two free parameters.

3Accuracy 
3.1Comparison to Simulation Data 
We i rst compare the model to galaxy catalogs obtained by applying semianalyical algorithms 
(Croton et al. 2006; De Lucia et al. 2006) to the Millennium Simulation (Springel et al. 2005). 
To test the impact of smoothing on various scales, we bin galaxies and dark matter into 
successively larger cubical pixels with side lengths 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 h−1Mpc; for each scale 
we calculate M = hNgaliA· (1 + δ)−1as 
a function of A = ln(1 + δ). When we determine the 
best-f i t parameters from Equation 4, we i nd an excellent i t at all i ve scales. Figure 1 shows 
two examples. 4 
1.00.50.00.51.0 
ln(1+δ) [Log mass units] 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
M≡ 
? Ngal 
? /(1+δ) 
[Galaxies 
per 
mass 
unit] 
SDSS Galaxies 
Ising model 
linear bias 
quadratic bias 
log bias 
Figure 2: Results from SDSS Main Galaxy Sample, compared to our model (Ising) and three 
other bias models. Horizontal error bars show the variation of ln(1 + δ) within each mass 
bin; vertical error bars ref l ect both the spread of measured Ngalvalues and the impact of the 
variation of 1 + δ within each bin. The three lowest bins contain no galaxies, and thus we 
show upper limits. Only the Ising model accurately ref l ects the galaxy distribution behavior 
for both high and low densities. 5

3.2Comparison to Observational Data 
For comparison to observed galaxy distributions, we use a roughly volume-limited catalog from 
the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Main Galaxy Sample (Blanton et al. 2005). To achieve 
reasonable number densities, we bin galaxies into cubical cells with 16h−1-Mpc sides, making 
cuts to avoid partially-f i lled pixels on sample borders. 
We also need the underlying dark matter distribution; for this purpose we use the prescrip- 
tion of Repp and Szapudi (2018) at the mean redshift (z = 0.15), matching the quantiles of 
(observed) galaxy and (prescribed) matter distributions. Figure 2 shows the resulting values 
of M alongside the best-f i t Ising model, plus three other bias models. 
The i gure shows that the Ising model best captures the relationship between matter and 
galaxy densities. Of the others, the linear bias roughly reproduces the high-end plateau but 
quickly becomes unphysical (Ngal< 0) at low densities. Indeed, at low densities the counts 
drop even faster than the Ising model predicts; nevertheless, our model is remarkably accurate 
given its lack of any halo modeling. 
4Conclusions 
Constraining theories of gravity with cosmological data requires modeling the relationship be- 
tween dark matter and galaxies, at both high and low densities. An interactionless Ising model 
(alternatively, a Fermi-Dirac model) yields a relationship that is both simple and surprisingly 
accurate. Indeed, the success of this model provides fundamental insight into galaxy formation 
by validating our assumption that galaxy formation is (to i rst approximation) a local process, 
with tidal i elds exerting only higher-order inf l uence. Additionally, the fact that our indepen- 
dent variable ln(1 + δ) is a proxy for initial density strengthens our conf i dence that the initial 
conditions largely determine the galaxy sites. 
Future work can extend this model with more accurate i ts, perhaps by including interaction 
terms—just as Sheth and Tormen (1999) expanded on the earlier Press-Schechter (1974) halo 
prescriptions. However, the model as it stands provides precisely what is necessary to place 
better constraints on dark energy and modif i ed gravity. 
References 
Blanton, M. R., Schlegel, D. J., Strauss, M. A., Brinkmann, J., Finkbeiner, D., Fukugita, M., 
Gunn, J. E., et al.: 2005, AJ 129, 2562 
Carroll, S. M.: 2001, Living Reviews in Relativity 4, 1 
Carron, J. and Szapudi, I.: 2013, MNRAS 434, 2961 
Croton, D. J., Springel, V., White, S. D. M., De Lucia, G., Frenk, C. S., Gao, L., Jenkins, A., 
Kauf f mann, G., Navarro, J. F., and Yoshida, N.: 2006, MNRAS 365, 11 
6 
de la Torre, S. and Peacock, J. A.: 2013, MNRAS 435, 743 
De Lucia, G., Springel, V., White, S. D. M., Croton, D., and Kauf f mann, G.: 2006, MNRAS 
366, 499 
Green, J., Schechter, P., Baltay, C., Bean, R., Bennett, D., Brown, R., Conselice, C., et al.: 
2012, ArXiv e-prints 
Hof f mann, K., Bel, J., and Gazta˜ naga, E.: 2017, MNRAS 465, 2225 
Laureijs, R., Amiaux, J., Arduini, S., Augu` eres, J. ., Brinchmann, J., Cole, R., Cropper, M., 
et al.: 2011, ArXiv e-prints 
Neyrinck, M. C., Szapudi, I., and Szalay, A. S.: 2009, ApJ 698, L90 
Pathria, R.: 1972, Statistical Mechanics, Pergamon, Oxford 
Press, W. H. and Schechter, P.: 1974, ApJ 187, 425 
Repp, A. and Szapudi, I.: 2018, MNRAS 473, 3598

Sheth, R. K. and Tormen, G.: 1999, MNRAS 308, 119 
Springel, V., White, S. D. M., Jenkins, A., Frenk, C. S., Yoshida, N., Gao, L., Navarro, J., 
et al.: 2005, Nature 435, 629 
Wolk, M., Carron, J., and Szapudi, I.: 2015, MNRAS 451, 1682


