I woke up this morning, like I do many days, and I spent the first hour of my day getting rid of ugly comments and blocking people and wondering "WHAT THE FUCK?!?!"

It's honestly gotten out of control. I can't write from the heart anymore. I have to cross reference every aspect of everything that I write before I post it. And there is an up side to this. I am really digging deep into the biological sciences and the psychology and the sociology of the subject-matter I often explore in my writing. But it is draining the art out of my expressions.

Sometimes I have to spend hours doing research on a simple ten word statement, because if there is any aspect of it that isn't 100% factually accurate, or even if it can be skewed or perverted into looking like it isn't, I will literally have tons of people(sometimes hundreds on a single post), show up and mock me, or attack me, or outright threaten me. This is happening all the time lately.

Everybody's playing the devil's advocate. Even people who agree with me are picking apart my statements. They argue with the order of the words that I use. They argue with the definitions of individual words. If they can problemize my words, they will. They will decontextualize. They will argue individual aspects without considering the rest of the writing. They will straw man, ad hominem, and bandwagon, until I'm too fucking exhausted to do anything but block them. 

I have a piece of poetry where I talk about encouraging people to be entirely themselves. I regularly receive death threats on this poem. DEATH THREATS. On a poem about accepting people. It happens just about every other time I post it. I have a piece of writing where I talk about my loved ones who have passed away going up into the heavens and setting stars on fire. I have had thousands of people mock me for this. Thousands. I promise you I'm not exaggerating. I posted it last week and I blocked several hundred people. 

I can't use poetic imagery anymore. Any kind of metaphor or similie gets picked apart. If I reiterate a point that anyone else has ever made, I get accused of plagiarism. And I don't mean using similar words. Simply because someone else has talked about the same subject-matter. God forbid that the subject of every single writing isn't entirely conceptualized and fabricated by the person who is writing about it. Can you imagine if astrophysicists were accused of plagiarism because they didn't invent calculus? It's absolutely out of control.

People have turned fabricating misunderstandings into an art. They seem to think that it's clever to pervert something that someone else has said, often with the intent of making it sound nefarious. They seemed to think that it is a sign of intelligence to deliberately misunderstand what you're saying. And it's disgusting. And I find myself angry at my audience. I just want to ask people "what the fuck is wrong with you? Why are you acting like this? What makes you think that this is okay?" It's disgusting behavior. It's petty and it's childish and it needs to stop being normalized. 

And people use this to justify absolutely venomous rebuttals. To rationalize open hostility. The attacks are just constant. I spend about three to four hours a day just blocking people. Now I am being targeted. So it's worse for me than it is for most people. I get hundreds of hostile or passive agressive comments every day. And part of this is due to the fact that I'm challenging some conventions. That I'm writing emotionally charged material. And the fact that i'm not hiding my own defects and shortcomings makes me even more of a target. 

But the process that I have to go through in order to write anything poetic anymore. It is sucking the life out of my work. And it is killing my love for writing. And some days it makes running my platform miserable. Absolutely miserable. 

My point.... If you're one of the people who does this... fuck you. FFFUUUCCCKKKK YYYOOOUUU! Fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck you. 

Fuck you very much. 

I'm feeling pretty over it right now. Fair warning, today is not the day to test me if you'd like to stick around..

This has been my Kalen talk
Fuck Ted