
Fox Kerry

Jul 30, 2021


The spaces you Struct

-Your soul can’t help it


They will tell who you are.

Those spaces you create.

They’re not mindful of privacy. They tattle. And can’t help it.

Are you cluttered of soul, in thought, in your integrity? So will your treehouse be.

Are you hyper-romantic, rivers on fire, with pillows in the heart? So will be your library, your kitchen, your etched out bowers.

Some builders catapult rugged ceilings of metal glass as high and fast as fused metal will travel. Living cement, confident solder, iron and gold. These are those who’d take heaven by storm.

Meanwhile . . . others nurse gardens and ponds, rivers of soft-flash. . . quiet rooms for the healing of the nations. These are earth’s peacefuls. And their structures pirrhouette like chapels and paint-rooms, cook nooks and ponder-chairs.

It can not be forsook, these mantles of creativity we bear on fleshpot wings. That God should call us Pillars, of one lean or the other — certainly we are Erect or Bent for His types of ordering — it is a calling too magnificent.

And we believe it. Tho’ we sometimes spire or slumber to bends and jerks of our own sort of swivel.

It’s why we sit museums and study and study earth’s windows. Those portals to memory and future. For on the tips of weaver’s brushes we spy eternity in their songs and secrets. We touch at their knowledge, color-wheeling all to what percolates in us.

We are timid architects. We are flames of chariot.

Maze-builders achase of corridors. Dropping and picking up holy and profane bread crumbs. Hansel and Gretel have nothing on we.

Can’t you hear them? Those hammers you play, subthoughtfully, there in the half-lights of time? Those explosive heartbeats you carry like tinder.

I knew a man once . . . couldn’t let his house look the same, from one month to the other. I was “auntied” by a lady, who was also that way, only hers was yearly.

We build and rebuild ourselves. Artists to the death. We feel the winds of inner engines. Taste at the pokes of flamework above. Shiver near forces , come with unlabeled faces. Daemons of invention, Angels with trade.

We know when we are pushed by something mischievous and wayward.

We catch also those pulls, when they’re elegant and good.

And then we craft out, those tugs to our antennas. We structure and putty-push the clay of these limbs. We posture our neighbors like Streeps on our stagework. We teach lungs to sing the strange poems in our veins.

And what are we building, we beavers and dancers?

Shall we Babelcrash twice, dragging tongues doubly stomped?

Or gentle like moths, will we flit-dust the canopies? And with butterfly blood snow the hills where men ski?

It’s hard work this knowing, this wall-paste, these bright nails. For there are people to please, and dreams to eek forth.

But it’s not all that hard if we lay down our dark oaths, forgiving other draftsmen we’ve hated of old. Swore we’d never build like. Let it go. Let it go.

There are structures to lace out, there are oceans to boat. Don’t you feel it in your spirit, that day you’ll be weighed. That rendering and reckoning, where artists give account . . .

So lift up those fingers, those fanned out little satelites. Step away from the landmines and let your tries soar.

For there we may listen . . . for He who did wire . . . the nodes of our souls, the dance in our legs. And try to replay a very deep chorus. A tomb we were made for, which breaks open wide.

We are great builders. Each one, you and I. Solomon our father, Lucifer our hound. We are builders with gumption, we’ve known it forever. Tress-workers always, with Avalon in our bones.

But for whom build we houses? To whom sing we roofs?

These are the questions that must angle our blows.