Physics of creation - Symmetry breaking, (en)active inference, and unfolding statespaces.
Temporo-spatial alignment and its role in consciousness ecology.
Embodied cognitive morphogenesis as a route to intelligent systems.
The variables of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) and their capability for collective autocatalysis.
A potential third transition in science beyond the Newtonian paradigm.
Free energy and inference in living systems.
An elementary model for the emergence of symmetry concepts by agent collectives.
Consciousness formalism and a symmetry theory of valence
The experimental analysis of imitation and self-organization in humans
The role of active inference and enactive approach in understanding embodied intelligence
How urban systems integrate adaptive knowledge into their structure
The cognitive activity of states and their interaction with landscapes and socio-cultural constraints
Thinking like a bat, thinking like a swarm, and references to Descent, Stars! (1995) and Age of Empires
Administrative systems and Predictive Processing
The concept of Rhyzomatic Scaling
The concept of subjective experience being potentially incomprehensible
the conscious experiences of other organisms may not be entirely inaccessible
The auditory operating system idea
The Physics of creation, Symmetry breaking, and Active Inference
Cliodynamics
General Semantics
The Null-A series by A. E. van Vogt
Embodied intelligence
Active Inference framework
Enactive approach to cognition
Deep history of human societies
Emergence of States
Hierarchical control systems
Structural identity and adaptive control
Multi-scale understanding of adaptation in biological systems
James C. Scott's work on States
Material structure of States
Dynamics of urbanization
Role of structural constraints in collective cognition
Holistic approach to studying human societies
Collective mind
Urban systems
Sociocultural niche construction
Theoretical foundations of cognitive science
Cognitive agents
Predictive processing
Understanding and control of societies
Anthropology of States
Post-carbon society
Livable future
Politics of the early Anthropocene
Cultural niche transformation
Self-organisation dynamics
Evolution of cities
Cultural evolution
Historical anthropology
Ecological niche
Markov blankets
Predictability of sensorimotor flow
Autonomous systems
Operational closure
Adaptive knowledge
Structural constraints
Meaning in a broader system's activity
Historical context of emergence
Collective cognition
Conceptual background
Self-creation and autopoiesis
Cognitive robotics
Reflexive understanding of the world
Adaptation and sense-making
Interdisciplinary research
Social sciences
Post-carbon society
Livable future
The Free Energy Principle
Epistemological interpretation of self-organisation