Probabilistic Diffusion in Random Network Graphs 
Dr. Natarajan Meghanathan 
Professor of Computer Science 
Jackson State University, MS, USA 
E-mail: natarajan.meghanathan@jsums.edu 
Abstract 
In this paper, we consider a random network such that there could be a link between any two nodes in the 
network with a certain probability (plink). Diffusion is the phenomenon of spreading information 
throughout the network, starting from one or more initial set of nodes (called the early adopters). 
Information spreads along the links with a certain probability (pdiff). Diffusion happens in rounds with the 
first round involving the early adopters. The nodes that receive the information for the first time are said 
to be covered and become candidates for diffusion in the subsequent round. Diffusion continues until all 
the nodes in the network have received the information (successful diffusion) or there are no more 
candidate nodes to spread the information but one or more nodes are yet to receive the information 
(diffusion failure). On the basis of exhaustive simulations conducted in this paper, we observe that for a 
given plink and pdiff values, the fraction of successful diffusion attempts does not appreciably change with 
increase in the number of early adopters; whereas, the average number of rounds per successful diffusion 
attempt decreases with increase in the number of early adopters. The invariant nature of the fraction of 
successful diffusion attempts with increase in the number of early adopters for a random network (for 
fixed plink and pdiff values) is an interesting and noteworthy observation (for further research) and it has not 
been hitherto reported in the literature. 
Keywords: Probabilistic Diffusion, Random Network Graphs, Early Adopters, Simulations 
1 Introduction 
We envision a random network of nodes such that information could propagate along any link with a 
certain probability. We are interested in the problem of analyzing how fast information (for example, the 
availability of funds, need for help, etc) originating from one or more nodes (referred to as the early 
adopters) in the network can diffuse (spread) to the other nodes of the network. Note that diffusion may 
not happen across all the links because there is only a certain chance with which a node may share the 
information to its neighbor node. Though probabilistic diffusion has been widely studied in the area of 
complex network analysis, most of the studies (e.g., [3, 6, 8]) are restricted to real-world network models 
and not conducted on theoretical models such as those that correspond to the random networks. Our 
conjecture is that phenomenon observed in random network models could be construed as those that 
simply happen by chance (due to the degree distribution of the vertices and not due to the nodes 
involved). If a similar phenomenon is observed in a real-world network whose degree distribution is 
similar to that of a random network, then we could conclude that the phenomenon observed in the real- 
world network also simply happens due to the distribution of the vertices and not due to the specific 
nature of the nodes involved. The above characteristic of random networks forms the motivation for our 
research in this paper. We are interested in analyzing the impact of increase in the number of early 
adopters on the success of diffusion in a random network (i.e., whether all the nodes in the network 
receive the information) and the delay associated with a successful diffusion attempt. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the system model and explains the 
diffusion phenomenon in random network graphs with an example. Section 3 presents the algorithm to 
construct random networks and presents the results of the simulation analyzing the impact of the number 
of early adopters on diffusion in a random network. Section 4 discusses related work. Section 5 draws