Figure 2: A putative ability of neural networks to transiently select subnetworks. A) A
schematic view on the transient selection hypothesis. i) The classical paradigm assumes that
connection strengths are fixed across all tasks that a neuron performs. i) Transient selection proposes
hat the routing of activity can temporarily change. Neurons are 'smart enough to use their receni
activity as a source of information for temporarily 'rewiring' their dendritic trees and axonal branches.
B) A cognitive operation such as perception of a grandmother is executed by transiently altering the
wiring of a network: To perceive a grandmother is to temporarily activate a subnetwork specific for
interactions with grandmothers (a "grandmother network"). Black: wires opened for traffic; gray:
wires closed for traffic. C) By sending outputs, a neuron not only inhibits or excites its targets but also
provides information on the basis of which the target rewires itself. This information can be sent (i)
backwards, (i) laterally, (ii) forward and (iv) possibly also to neurons with which no direct synaptic
connection is formed (disjoined interaction). D) Metabotropic receptors (MRs) and G protein-gated ion
channels (GPGICs) are the membrane proteins proposed to be responsible for the transient selection
capabilities of neural networks. An MR detects presence of a ligand in the extracellular space and
eleases a G protein which the activates a GPGIC; GPGIC opens or closes and by doing so alters the
electrical properties of the membrane. E) One source of ligands are 'runaway' neurotransmitters
resulting from nearby synaptic activity. F) As subnetworks are transiently selected, formed are novel
emporary sensory-motor loops specific for the current task. G) Example of a temporary sensory
motor loop needed to drive a car - to keep the car within a lane by keeping constant a given visual
angle making corrections by turning the steering wheel.
The second requirement is that the changes to wiring are sturdy. The new state of some
pathways being selected, and others being shut off must remain in place while the
subnetwork is being bombarded with new inputs; incoming activity should not be able to
wash away' the changes made to wiring. Again, sturdiness should not be brought about by
introducing an auxiliary network that would for example, apply recurrent activity. Again, such
additional networks would produce an explosion in required resources. Consequently, the
system would not scale well In conclusion, everything needs to be implemented locally, the
decisions and the maintenance of changes made.
Finally, the third requirement is that the changes are made in a transient manner: each
change should be reverted back after some time. Transiency ensures that one can return to
previous tasks, thoughts and ideas. No change should cross the point of no return. The
duration over which these transient changes should be valid i.e., until they revert back to the
initial state, probably varies and can be estimated from the known duration of our sensory
memory. The duration of the visual sensory memory (aka, iconic memory) has been
estimated to 200 to 300 ms [22, 23] and that of the auditory sensory memory (aka, echoic
memory) to up to 10 seconds [24]. These time windows are much longer than what the
changes in neuron's hyper- or depolarization can hold, as the altered states of voltages last
no longer than several miliseconds and can easily be 'washed away" by incoming inputs.