Philip van Nedervelde As someone with aphantasia, these kind of articles seem like they were written by an alien. I can't possibly imagine how picturing a bicycle floating across the sky could possibly be easy, it seems to me completely impossible.

I never see or hear anything in my head when thinking or remembering, and definitely I would remember if I ever saw anything like a bicycle in the sky or any other object. I would not even know where to start.

Exercises like this seen competely pointless. I know I can imagine things and remember things, and can plan ahead, but I also know I have never seen anything in my head like an image or a scenario.

People often claim to be using images for all kinds of tasks, but I find it easier to do many of them and so it is difficult to imagine how or why one would ever need or want visual mental imagery. It just sounds like it would be chaotic and distracting.

I can read a book while listening to another book and hold a conversation, it wound be extremely inconvenient if there ever any images or sounds

I find it difficult to imagine how this is not common knowledge. Galton's 1890 study was the first to apply statistical methods to a questionnaire  found 1 out of 100  scientists claimed no mental images and 1 very vivid, with most in between. 

Huxley's Doors of Perception is explicitly about his lack of mental imagery.

Many people have written about their mental imagery, which is always interesting, but I am always very skeptical.

It doesn't seem like it would be useful for anything and whenever someone describes something they thought or seen, I can think of it, but I don't need an image for it, so it seems kind of superfluous.

It seems impossible for the author of the article to imagine that a task like that would seem difficult or incomprehensible to some people.

I can't imagine why one would need an image for nearly any thought, and imagery would seem to make all kinds of thoughts difficult. If I said to imagine a person wearing a coat that was neither red nor blue.

I don't mean a young male facing left wearing purple, or a woman sitting down wearing orange, but this is what many people immediately imagine.

I mean that the age and the gender and posture and color are not specified. It would be incorrect to picture it as green, or brown, or yellow. I mean every color that is not red or blue, not a specific color.

Anyways, it is clear to me that I know where things are in my home, and have a map of my city, and can cook, do electrical, plumbing, and all kinds of things I don't need an actual map or recipe or blueprint for any of this, and there is nothing resembling an image. 

Anyways, I have been arguing with people about this for many decades but I have doubt I have every convinced anyone. I used to say I don't picture things or I don't have a visual memory or a "photographic memory".

Most people are confused by this because they mean perfect recall and I mean anything even slightly resembling an image. People just think I'm lying, they can't imagine thought without images.

But I can't imagine anyone would need images, it seems to me that they using my techniques without their awareness, and then generating a slide show of some kind to accompany it.

It seems to me that it would be counterproductive and less reliable then just thinking of the thing without picturing it.

It seems that mental imagery causes all kinds of distress, intrusive thoughts, distorted memory, in ability to concentrate or relax.

Of course I can see the value of manipulatives and visuals but I can't see how doing them in your head would be very helpful. It seems unfair that there should be so much identity politics about this.

I really can't picture why anyone would want or need images in their head, and I wouldn't know how to turn it on or to develop it. 

There isn't even a kind of faint outline I could turn into an image by concentrating or through practice.

So it is extremely confusing when people equate imagery with fantasy, imagination, memory, or thought.