Alan Lee Litman’s earliest creations were far from successes. In his basement laboratory, surrounded by chemicals and notebooks, he invented a waterless egg cooker in 1963. He’d also placed his hopes on an infrared nursing bottle heater, but then a young female teacher from the high school where his wife taught was mugged. Litman and his wife began to discuss products a woman might use to protect herself.

Alan Litman experimented with kerosene, Freon, and sulfuric acid—chemicals that act as severe irritants and could be sprayed into eyes and faces. He ultimately chose chloroacetophenone, a chemical the U.S. military used as a tear gas during WWII to create his “Chemical Mace.” Since it was already a known irritant, he did not receive a patent.

Alan Littman went on to specialize in safety and self-defense. He received patents for a burglar alarm and an “antipersonnel grenade.” But the thing that puzzles me is his transformation from basement inventor of domestic creations to “pocked-sized personal protection.” Something about that young female colleague of Doris Litman’s must have shaken him. Maybe he imagined his own wife mugged on the streets of downtown Pittsburgh. Maybe Litman climbed the steps out of his basement laboratory and into the bright lights of the kitchen, and over Doris’s meatloaf and mashed potatoes, he found he could not stop thinking about the woman who had been attacked. At night, while he brushed his teeth and in the morning as he sipped his coffee, he thought about the young teacher.

*

Alan and Doris Litman’s pet Orinoco crocodile is now a type specimen at the Smithsonian.


Melissa Fraterrigo 


The Forgotten History of Mace, Designed by a 29-Year-Old and Reinvented as a Police Weapon

When riots shook America, mace became a tool of crowd control instead of private protection

Daniel A. Gross

November 4, 2014

￼Oakland police use Mace during Oakland's "Stop the Draft Week" October 16, 1967, the largest anti-Vietnam war protest in the San Francisco bay area to that date, in downtown Oakland. © William James Warren/Science Faction/Corbis

In May 1968, in front of photographers and television cameras, Sheriff Joseph Woods wiped a tear from his eye. As an unyielding ex-Marine who hadn't hesitated using force against protestors in Chicago and its suburbs, Woods wasn't really the crying type. He was tearing up because he had just been shot by mace—which, he argued, "is a very humane weapon." The television cameras were broadcasting his attempt to try and prove his point.

Mace was only four years old at this point, and hadn't even reached the consumer market yet—but in its short lifespan, it had already been transformed from a tool of private protection to a front-line weapon of riot control. Strangely enough, it began as the household invention of a young Pittsburgh couple who kept an alligator in the basement. Over time, from Los Angeles to D.C. to Ferguson, it became a ubiquitous and potent symbol of both justice and injustice.

Report this ad

Half a century ago, Alan and Doris Litman lived in Pittsburgh. Doris was a science teacher and Alan, 29 years old, was an inventor, which presumably meant he was waiting for a big break from one of his many pending patents. Journalist Garry Wills portrayed Litman as an enthusiastic and idiosyncratic graduate of the University of Pittsburgh, where among other things he'd done experiments on animal intelligence. This explained why, to the bewilderment of visitors, he and Doris kept an alligator in the basement. It was named Ernst.

Litman's early creations sound like they came off a shelf at Sears. In 1961, he submitted a patent application for an "Infrared nursing bottle heater," a device that warmed milk for infants, and in 1963 he sketched a "waterless egg cooker" and a "bacon cooker." All three inventions seem to have slipped into the netherworld of products that never saw profits. One year later, however, his focus underwent an unexpected shift. He submitted a 1964 application for an "Assailant Incapacitator" and another for an "Aerosol Safety Device," the two of which combined into a little bottle for spraying harsh chemicals. Litman had gone from designing home goods to designing devices for "pocket-sized personal protection." Eventually he'd even patent an "Anti-personnel grenade."

This raises an obvious question. How in the world did Alan Litman go from a builder of bacon cookers to the designer of anti-personnel grenades?

It all started when one of Doris Litman's colleagues, a young female teacher, was mugged on the streets of Pittsburgh. According to several newspaper accounts, when she brought the story home to Alan, the pair started discussing the tools a woman might use in self-defense. Pocket-sized pepper sprays existed, but they often unintentionally afflicted the sprayer, or took so long to sink in that they simply failed to deter attackers. 



So the Litmans started running experiments in their home. They toyed with aerosol spray cans, figuring out how to better direct liquids. They mixed chemicals like kerosene, Freon, and sulfuric acid to dissolve and propel harsh irritants. After trying a dizzying array of chemicals that seared the eyes and face, they settled on chloroacetophenone, a chemical the U.S. military had highlighted as a potent tear gas during World War II. At first they called it TGASI, for "Tear Gas Aerosol Spray Instrument," but soon they came up with the catchier name of "Chemical Mace." According to newspaper reports, the name implied that chemicals could produce the same incapacitating effect as a medieval mace—a chilling design of spiked club—but without causing the same brutal injuries. Alan sent off patent applications for a spray can, nozzle, and their chemical mixture. 

"Chemical Mace" joined a growing list of technologies designed to disarm without killing. Just a handful of chemicals are considered incapacitating but non-lethal, but they're harnessed in weapons from grenades to sprays to artillery shells. Pepper sprays all harness a single chemical, capsaicin, which is the active ingredient of chili peppers and immediately produces an intense burning sensation all across the face. The remaining chemicals, including the active ingredient in Chemical Mace, fall into the category of tear gases. These take effect more slowly than pepper sprays and cause particular pain in the mucous membranes of the eyes and mouth. All these chemicals—pepper spray and the handful of "non-lethal" tear gases—produce the same basic effect: they attach to sensory receptors on our nerve endings and produce the sensation of burning pain.

Mace wasn't innovative because of its active ingredient, which had already been synthesized in laboratories and discussed for its military applications. It was innovative because it repackaged a chemical weapon as a civilian product. Because it wasn't considered deadly, it didn't violate federal laws; because of its spray bottle design, it could fit in your pocket. And in this form, mace was almost immediately a success. The prototype spray bottle became the foundation of Alan Litman's new business, the General Ordnance Equipment Corporation. 

Just two years later, with patent applications still pending, Litman accepted a $100,000 offer for the company from Smith & Wesson—the famed manufacturer of guns and ammunition. His new employer, which made him director of nonlethal weaponry research, bridged the two key markets for weapons that don't kill: private consumers and law enforcement. Mace was in the midst of a transformation. 

Patenting "Chemical Mace" proved far more difficult than Litman anticipated. Because the chemical had already been identified by scientists, he never managed to patent a chemical mixture for his devices. His early sprayer design wasn't granted a patent either, and only after years of tweaking, in 1969, did he arrive at a patentable sprayer design that we'd still recognize today.


By 1967, mace was being tested on unruly crowds across the nation. Norman Mailer mentioned mace in reporting from antiwar rallies in Washington. As a November story in the Pittsburgh Reading Eagle suggested the concept of a spray weapon was still something of a surprise: "Police from Scituate, R.I. To Chula Vista, Calif., have added a new weapon to their arsenals—an aerosol can of gas." But even though mace was experimental, it was quickly becoming a weapon of the front lines.

https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/forgotten-history-mace-designed-29-year-old-and-reinvented-police-weapon-180953239/

Pepper spray is a fairly recent invention, but the idea of using peppers as a weapon is a few thousand years old, going back to Ancient China and India, where people would fling bits of peppers into the eyes of attackers.

Capsaicin was also weaponized in the Americas, where they also grew naturally but in a slightly different way. The Aztecs, for instance, would often throw peppers into a fire to create an airborne irritant.

Pepper spray history, as we know it, began in the early 1960s when a young inventor named Alan Litman heard about a mugging and consulted with his wife about how to protect themselves.

The idea they settled on was a portable spray that could stop attackers without killing them. They agreed it had to be chemical, but weren't sure which chemicals to use. They eventually settled on a chemical mixture that the US Army had already weaponized.

https://www.zarc.com/t-pepper-spray-history

https://www.officer.com/tactical/less-lethal/irritant-sprays/article/21293986/history-of-macepepper-spray

twenty feet,' he device is known initially as TGASI, an acronym for Tear
Gas Aerosol Spray Instrument. TGASI was renamed Chemical Mace after
Litman was granted a registered trademark on the name.'7
ADVERTISEMENT
STINGER
2020
SPOI
STREOMLIGHT.
5G C
Solu
Vehi
A new company, General Ordnance Equipment Corporation,
headquartered in Pittsburgh, was formed to market the new weapon, The
company had three officers, which included Litman as the engineering
director, along with four employees. nstead of being offered to the
general public, the device was marketed to law enforcement as an
alternate weapon to the firearm and nightstick, It became popular not only
like Hong Kong, China, and Pakistan. The success of Mace led the famous agencies
with police agencies in the United States but international police
gun manufacturer, Smith & Wesson to purchase the company in 1967,.'91
Vide
in
Di
2022
Trus
Safe
In 1968, police departments started reevaluating their use of Mace based
on a Surgeon General's report that it could have lasting health effects. The
report suggested that further testing was needed for those with heart
conditions. Civil rights groups began to criticize the use of Mace. 110]
Although Litman refuted the report that there were any long-term harmful
effects, the only testing performed on Mace had come from the company.
The exact ingredients of mace were kept secret for fear that competitors
would copy it. That led to speculation that Mace contained harmful
chemicals that could cause permanent damage. The Surgeon General
suggested that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) conduct
governmental testing. However, they were reluctant because Mace was not
a drug and was unavailable to consumers. However, that was not entirely
e uor cement supply
true, as the public could still buy Mace from law enforcement supply and
stores. 1 0nly ,tre
military surplus stores.'"' Only at the urging of Congress did the FDA begin
(2]
testing the product.
To prove Mace was not dangerous, Cook County (IL) Sheriff Joseph Woods
was the first volunteer sprayed with Mace as part of a controlled
experiment. The study was led by the chief medical officer of the Cook
County sheriff's department and a doctor with the University of Illinois
They had already been testing Mace on animals for months. Their findings
were that Mace was safe and had no lasting effects,"131 Around the same
lasting efrect .
time, an unbiased report by a research team at the University ity of of Michigan
determined that Mace was not dangerous if used following instructions
and if victims were given treatment promptly. The experiments showed
that Maoa nradiioad oirnifioant olrin inritatian rarhioh it tarne dacimnad ta da

When Mace was invented, it was initially intended as a defensive weapon for women. In 1962, Doris Heil, a high school biology teacher from Pittsburgh, was upset when her friend was attacked while walking down the street. Just talking about fighting crime wasn’t enough, so she had an idea for a defensive weapon for women to ward off attackers. Her idea was an aerosol tear gas device. She took it to a local inventor, Alan Litman, who designed the prototype. It was equipped with a safety catch to prevent it from being fired accidentally.[4]

The basis of his formula was CN gas. However, Litman realized that when CN gas mixes with water, it can form hydrochloric acid, causing a severe burn. The purpose of the device was to incapacitate, not maim.  So he experimented and created a combination of CN gas and other chemicals to form phenyl chloromethyl ketone. When the chemical comes into contact with the skin, it reacts with the oils, affecting the nerve endings. The eyes begin to burn, the intake of oxygen is reduced, and the person becomes weak in the knees. The effects last between 15-20 minutes with a range of twenty feet.[6] The device is known initially as TGASI, an acronym for Tear Gas Aerosol Spray Instrument. TGASI was renamed Chemical Mace after Litman was granted a registered trademark on the name.[7]


https://www.officer.com/tactical/less-lethal/irritant-sprays/article/21293986/history-of-macepepper-spray#_ftn7

Chemical mace backed by its distributor.” The Evening Sun. May 15, 1968, 46.