different part of the brick exists at the Eiffel Tower. By contrast, to say the gold brick 
exists at some place now and then is to say that the brick in its entirety exists first at one 
time and then in its entirety at a later time. In other words, whereas the gold brick does 
have spatial parts (it can be divided, e.g., into equal spatial slices), it does not have 
temporal parts. That is to say, objects such as our gold brick cannot be divided into 
temporal parts, and this is why an object cannot wholly occupy a certain space both now 
and then.37 There is, however, no conceptual difficulty in the gold brick’s being in 
Dingwall in 1950 and then being in Dingwall in 2012 (viz., by laying unmoved in a bank 
vault).38 The analogy between space and time therefore is simply not an apt one, and so 
neither is the analogy between God’s spacelessness and timelessness. It is for this reason, 
as we shall see, that one’s decision regarding the metaphysical nature of time is essential 
to one’s position on the nature of divine eternality. 
So Scripture is inconclusive regarding precisely how God’s eternity is to be 
conceived. That temporalists and atemporalists offer mutually exclusive conceptions of 
divine eternity is, as we have seen, evident from their contradictory portrayals of 
metaphysical reality. A foundational decision in adjudicating this debate, therefore, will 
involve which of these metaphysical accounts of time is accurate. Indeed, this decision 
will play a considerable role in the discussions of chapters two and three. 
37 Indeed, it is difficult to imagine just what a ‘temporal part’ would be. For lucid discussion of this point, 
see William Lane Craig, The Tenseless Theory of Time: A Critical Examination (The Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic, 2001), pp. 197ff; Peter Van Inwagen, ‘The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts,’ in 
Ontology, Identity, and Modality: Essays in Metaphysics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001); 
E. J. Lowe, ‘Substance Identity Over Time,’ Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 62 (1988): 61-78; 
and Stephen Barker and Phil Dowe, ‘Paradoxes of Multi-Location,’ Analysis 63 (2003): 106-114. 
38 Gale further explores disanalogies involving actions (e.g., the action of waiting: if I wait thirty minutes 
for something, my use of ‘now’ designates a different time, regardless of whether I travel during that time 
or not. The spatial analog to this—waiting through space—is absurd. Cf. Gale, ‘Here’ and ‘Now,’ pp. 84ff 
and Trenton Merricks, ‘Persistence, Parts and Presentism,’ Noûs 33 [1999]: 421-438).

From TIME AND ETERNITY: A STUDY OF THE 
‘ACCIDENTAL TEMPORALIST’ VIEW 
A Thesis Presented 
for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
at the University of Aberdeen 
By R. Keith Loftin 
M.A. Louisiana State University 
M.A. University of Dallas 
B.A. Southeastern Bible College 
December 2013