As someone with aphantasia, I find these kinds of articles difficult to relate to. I can't imagine how picturing a bicycle floating across the sky could be easy; it seems impossible to me. I never see or hear anything in my head when thinking or remembering, and I wouldn't even know where to start.

Exercises like this seem completely pointless to me. While I know I can imagine and remember things and plan ahead, I've never seen anything in my head like an image or a scenario. People often claim to use images for all kinds of tasks, but I find it easier to do many of them without visual mental imagery. It just sounds like it would be chaotic and distracting.

I can read a book while listening to another book and hold a conversation, and it would be extremely inconvenient if there were ever any images or sounds. Galton's 1890 study found that 1 out of 100 scientists claimed to have no mental images and 1 had very vivid mental images, with most falling somewhere in between. Huxley's "Doors of Perception" is explicitly about his lack of mental imagery.

While many people have written about their mental imagery, I'm always skeptical. It doesn't seem useful for anything, and whenever someone describes something they've thought or seen, I can think of it without needing an image for it.

It seems impossible for the author of the article to imagine that a task like imagining a floating bicycle would seem difficult or incomprehensible to some people. I can't imagine why anyone would need an image for nearly any thought, and imagery would seem to make all kinds of thoughts difficult. If I asked someone to imagine a person wearing a coat that was neither red nor blue, I wouldn't expect them to immediately picture a young male facing left wearing purple, or a woman sitting down wearing orange.

Anyways, I know where things are in my home, have a mental map of my city, and can do electrical, plumbing, and all kinds of things without needing an actual map or blueprint. There's nothing resembling an image in any of this.

I've been arguing with people about this for many decades, but I doubt I've ever convinced anyone. I used to say that I don't have a visual memory or a "photographic memory." Most people are confused by this because they mean perfect recall, but I mean anything even slightly resembling an image. People just think I'm lying; they can't imagine thought without images.

But I can't imagine anyone would need images. It seems to me that they're using my techniques without their awareness and then generating a slide show of some kind to accompany it. It seems counterproductive and less reliable than just thinking of the thing without picturing it.

Mental imagery seems to cause all kinds of distress, such as intrusive thoughts, distorted memory, inability to concentrate or relax. Of course, I can see the value of manipulatives and visuals, but I can't see how doing them in your head would be very helpful. It seems unfair that there should be so much identity politics about this.

I really can't picture why anyone would want or need images in their head, and I wouldn't know how to turn it on or develop it. There isn't even a faint outline I could turn into an image by concentrating or through practice. It's extremely confusing when people equate imagery with fantasy, imagination, memory, or thought.
