In the story of Squee: the Robot Squirrel, Squee is a curious and adventurous little squirrel who lives in a forest. Squee is fascinated by the world around him and wants to learn as much as he can about it. One day, Squee comes across a group of robots who are on a mission to learn as much as they can about the world. Squee is intrigued by the robots and their quest for knowledge and decides to join them on their journey.

Squee learns that the robots have a vast database of information that they can access at any time. They are able to quickly learn new things and answer complex questions. Squee is amazed by the robots' ability to learn so much and so quickly, but he realizes that there is one big difference between the robots and himself: the robots have access to more information than he does.

Squee begins to think about how he can become more like the robots and have access to more information. He decides to start reading books, watching educational videos, and learning from experienced teachers. Squee puts in a lot of hard work and spends many long hours learning new things.

Eventually, Squee becomes a knowledgeable and well-informed squirrel, just like the robots. He is able to answer complex questions and provide insightful perspectives on a variety of topics. Squee is proud of what he has achieved, but he also realizes that there is always more to learn and that he should never stop seeking knowledge.

In this story, Squee's journey from a curious and adventurous squirrel to a knowledgeable and well-informed squirrel is a metaphor for the importance of continuous learning and the power of exposure to a rich environment. The story also illustrates the idea that there is no limit to what a person (or animal) can learn and that the only thing that separates the knowledgeable from the uninformed is the amount of information they have access to and the effort they are willing to put into learning.

This story also relates to the theme of the "poverty of the stimulus," which states that a child's language abilities are not solely determined by the limited language they are exposed to in their early years, but are also shaped by the child's innate ability to learn language. In the same way, Squee's knowledge and understanding of the world is not limited by the information he is exposed to in his early years, but is also shaped by his innate curiosity and drive to learn.
