From
Causal Realism: An Essay on Philosophical Method and the Foundations of Knowledge

￼

John C. Cahalan

John C. Cahalan, 1985 - Philosophy - 503 pages

This book shows that “Every change is caused” is knowably necessary,
contrary to Hume. That changes everything in subsequent philosophy;
for the false dichotomy between epistemically necessary truths and
truths informing us of what exists arises only as a result of Hume. Also
false is the common premise of rationalism and empiricism: knowledge
of necessary truth cannot come from experience. Causal Realism
analyses necessary truth, for the first time, as a function of general truth
conditions. Doing so allows it to explain our knowledge of logic and
mathematics, provide non-Kantian foundations for empirical knowledge,
and show why post-fregean methods have not reduced philosophic
disagreement and paradox. Its ground-breaking arguments make use
of overlooked contributions of two modern classical realists, Maritain
and Simon, who were consistent with their tradition but greatly advance it in response to modern problems and insights.


I owe the distinction between things and objects, the identity theory
of truth and the distinction between ontological and empirical analysis
to Jacques Maritain's The Degrees of Knowledge (hereafter, DK). DK is
also my main source for the distinction between entitative and in-
tentional existence. The pertinent sections of this difficult work should
be read in the following order: first and foremost, the pivotal Chapter
Three, and with it sections 8, 18-19 and 26-30 of Chapter Two, and
sections 1-4 of Appendix I; then the rest of Chapter Two, Chap-
ters Four and Five, sections 3-8 and 13-19 of Chapter Eight, and
section 2 of Appendix V. (For the insight that the "correspondence"
required for truth is the identity of a thing with itself, see Q 97,
2:)
n.
DK is Maritain's most mature statement of his theory of knowledge
But helpful background can be found in his earlier Réflexions
SuT
'intelligence et sur sa vie propre and the ''Preface to the Second Editior
of La Philosophie Bergsonnienne"' translated in Bergsonian Philosophy and
Thomism. See also his (1937, pp. 154-62), (1941b) and (1957). The reader
of Maritain should be warned that his footnotes are often as impor-
Clearsearch X
BUY EBOOK - CA$O.O0
Get this book in prins
Causal Realism: An Essay on
Philosophical Method and the
Foundations of.
By John C. Cahalan
"diacritical realism"
GO
About this book
‣ Mylibrary
‣ My History
Terms of Service
Pages displayed by permission of John C.
Cahalan. Copyright.
485
Digitized by Google
Copyrnghted matori:
important as his text. (lt was also Maritain, 1944, PP. 130-41, who made
me aware of Cajetan's refutation of Anselm.)
A number Of WOrks are very helpful for the further study Of
diacritical- realism. Simon' S Introduction d 'ontologie duc connaitre should
the be Eight (1939), essays gested essays of by mentioned are and his of this F Wild The collected first. work FitzGerald Great (1947). My in (pp- The_ Dialogue (1963), 9-18). Many arguments Retum OT of See EC Parker for the Nature also Reason, (1953, and intentional Simon discussions 1960 edited Space. in (1960a) and by existence Several Wild; and Veatch's 1962), were and Chapter relevant Phelan Inten- SUg see
of tal by the tiọnal 1have from from Deely 1982b, (1981). Maritain Thomas. Hachey or Atomism The something forthcoming ' views 1972 predicamental, anyone Strangely, knowledgei Logic mixed cOvers 1983, called Poinsot is Peifer and Tradition to (1957) Poinsot a and have a has in the other is 1984) i edition realist and is relations; material, The remedy via Two variety Heidegger already are "Forthcoming' crucial collected than categorical of presented. of Logics definitely Mystery critique Almeida that t Heidegger also what relations, topicso Poinsot's run many Or LO concerning available Maritain. very thing-object of not The by situation have Much pure of for Sampaio Parallel Knowledge. Poinsot i in the t concerning Deely articles Treatise relevant, Bergmann the called c For The to material is Hopefully Classic relations.) distinction intentional On and of (1963). a or as t and Peterson's formal is uninitiated, Material Signs, are texts language applications e to others sustained provide has his One Rasmussen this be on those existence and relations Logic in been call can Realism of school. found. book the in ofp however. realism's some t little (1980, background also that and in titles Henle cOmparison and John s has others transcenden- t et of material Dasein. consult studied Deely's distinc- 1982a, theory Logicnl (What listed done call for al. St. of
that 207- tion in -215; d Maritain's other 1983, S pP. Contexts, doctrine 532-533). see and his Cahalan The meaning reader (1971; for t 1975, should the Pp. be word aware, 354-362, "Object' 1981, however, include Pp-
oth epistemological and metaphysical (in that sense of "'metaphysi-
cal' which is opposed to "epistemological ') aspects. Since I have been
oncerned only with the epistemological side of the distinction, 1 have
used ''object'' only in the epistemological sense of that which is
describable as term of a knowledge relation. Still, nothing I have said
using the word in this sense contradicts anything Maritain has said
using the word in his more inclusive sense.
On ontological and empirical analysis and the philosophy of science,



And

Cinematic Moments: Call of Duty's Opening Montage
Space in Call of Duty is organized around both non-interactive and interactive
configurations: the opening montage constitutes a central non-interactive moment, while the
explorable game space itself offers interactive play with more meaningful player agency. Both
configurations serve different purposes for constructing a particular subject position: the
moments characterized by little player agency infuse the game with markers of authenticity by
referencing the authority of photographic indexicality, while also presenting its ideological
agenda.
Aesthetically disconnecting Call of Duty's opening sequence from the playable missions
stablishes a dichotomy between the "authenticity" of its cinematics and the viscerally engaging
gameplay. Film and media scholar Tanine Allison explores this strategy in her 2010 article "The
Norld War II Video Game Adaptation, and Postmodern History"
[Such a] sequence places the player outside of history, as a contemporary viewer
watching cable television and learning about events far in the past. The separation of
these sequences from the rest of the gameplay reinforces the sense that this • footage
may be authentic, but it is dated and obsolete, while the full-color, interactive combat
missions of the game are immediate and viscerally engaging. The game may not be
authentic in the same way this combat footage purports to be, but it does give the
illusion of presence and interactivity that the older images lack. (189)
Allison's attention to the game's dichotomy points to a kind of diacritical realism, in which two
of its modes- photorealism and visceral realism (see chapter II) claim authenticity by
distinguishing themselves from each other.
Call of Duty's cinematic opening, to some extent located "outside of history," indeed
serves to establish a sense of historical realism (or "authenticity," the closely related concept
146
used by Allison). In this way, the opening sequence introduces a type of gameplay that cannot
compete with the trust generally bestowed on cinematic representations.ns However, it associates
this aesthetic with images created within the game's engine, rather than constructing digital
images in a distinct visual composition. As a result, by making use of gameplay's visual
language, the opening infuses these computer-generated images with the authority of mentioned
dated and obsolete" depictions and carries them over to the visuals of play.
The opening montage begins with the virtual camera moving over six black and white
images that were created within the game's engine, rather than with a camera, fading into each
other. They show tanks attacking a city', a Russian flag being raised among rubble, soldiers
running through a town, a soldier firing in front of a church, troops in the trenches and troops
running up the hill. Some of these images were edited to evoke photography's materiality
through folds in its paper ( Figure 56).

In 
Embodied Historiographies: Affect and Realism in the "Medal of Honor" and 
"Call of Duty" Franchises after "Saving Private Ryan" 
by 
Marc-Niclas Heckner 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
(Germanic Languages and Literatures and Screen Arts and Cultures) 
in The University of Michigan 
2018

And

Critical realism may refer to:

Critical realism (philosophy of perception), a perspective that states that some sense-data are accurate to external objects

Critical realism (philosophy of the social sciences), philosophical approach associated with Roy Bhaskar

Theological critical realism, a term used in the religion–science interface community

Social realism, particularly applied to art

