Purple is made of a deep red & a deep blue, so that the blue being diluted, the red becomes predominant & the blue, if the red be diluted. Boyle of Colours Exper 20. It may be produced by mixing vermilion & bise dry.

Whiteness of bodies proceeds from their flaws & other pores filled with air or some more reflecting ether, & therefore is diminished by admitting water, oil, turpentine into its pores, as in paper, linen, silk, the Oculus mundi stone, white marble, etc.

Hence may be explained many phenomena of the air, such as about mists, clouds, meteors, halos, & of many other colored bodies as liquids.

All the natural regular figures of bodies may be imitated by compositions of equilateral triangles, & perhaps caused by globules which do naturally lie in that form.

Some may make a four-square posture, and solids are made by conveniently laying one such surface on another.

The ice on the surface of frozen urine is insipid, & branched from a center with six branches of various lengths. 

These stems do not cross their primary branches but their secondary ones do, not joining but lying one over another in this order. A most admirably curious figure, much imitated by ferns.

Gravel in urine are flat like fragments of Muscovy glass & are dissolvable by oil of vitriol, spirit of urine & other saline menstruums. Their diameter is about 1/128 of an inch.

Kettering stone, which is harder than free stone, consists of nothing but small globules a little flattened. The least globule not exceeding the greatest in diameter more than four times. This curious stone appears but rude to the naked eye.

Purple is made of a deepe red & a deepe blew, so yt the blew being diluted, ye red becomes praedominant & ye blew if ye red bee diluted. Boyle of Colours Exper 20. It may bee produced by mixing vermilion & bise dry.

Whitnesse of bodys proceeds from their flaws & other pores fflled wth aire or some more reflecting Ether, & therefore is diminished by admitting water, oyle, turpentine into its pores as in Paper, linnen, silke, ye Occulus mundi stone, White marble &c.

Hence may bee explained many Phaenomena of ye aire as about Mists, clouds, Meteors, Halos, &c.

All the naturall regular figures of bodys may bee imitated by composions of equilaterall triangles & perhaps caused by globules wch doe naturally lye in that forme. Solids are made by conveniently laying one such surface on another.

The Ice on ye surface of frozen Urin is insipid, & branched from a center wth six branches of various lengths. These stems & their primary branches crossed not, but their secondary &c did, not joyning but lying one over another in this order. A most admirably curious figure.

Gravell in Urin are flat like fragments of muscovy glasse & are dissolvable by oyle of Vitriol, spirit of Urin & other saline menstruums. Their diameter is about 1/128 of an inch.

Kettering stone (wch is harder yn free stone) consists of nothing but small globules (a little flatted into Ellipses by unequal pressure one upon another whilst they were soft liquor, & but just touching in small surfaces, yet very firmly united so as not to bee parted without breaking a piece one out of the other, wch sometimes made a hole through ye outmost thin crusty shell & discovered two substances within like ye white & yelke of an Egge) whose intestitia appear empty & therefore ye stone may be blowne through like a Cane.

The least globule not exceeding ye greatest in diameter more yn or 4 times. This curious stone appears but rude to ye naked eye. Hence may some conjectures be raised of ye porousness of bodys for ye progress of light.

White Marble wch may bee polished as smooth as glass will bee imbued quite through wth oyle of turpentine or pitch in wch 'tis boiled. Some liquors will corrode glass if kept long in it.

The Occulus mundi stone put into water makes it in time bubble a little, becomes transparent & heavier, weighing 6 3/256 graine when wet & 5 202/256 graine when dry, wch argues their porousness.

Cole charred (by covering ye wood in a crucible wth ...



From Newton's notes on Leeuwenhoek's microscope
