Summarize: The Theory of Harmonic Ontological Algebric Existence
Bahaa Iz,
Moonspic
bahaa.ezz@hotmail.com
9"", May, 2023
o
Summary of this theory: The theory of ontological algebra suggests a new representation of the
infinity and zero that considers each of them as a "field". That field is equivalent to the real field in
maintaining classic operations like addition and multiplication. The main basis of that theory is that the
classic
multiplication of zero and infinity that subscribe the same real element is equal to that real element. For
example 0s * Infs = 3. Whereas the undermined result comes when the basis of zero and infinity
mismatches. The classic real number can be written as number with 0, and Inf, altogether. However,
despite that the concept of zero and infinity are totally different in the classic algebraic operations, there
is nothing special about how these fields are dealt with in that theory. In fact, if the name of these zero
and infinity field is changed, the operations that dictate the situation that lead to a real number will
remain the same. That does tempt to generalize the theory to multiple dimension (n) that satisfy the
same dogma in that the multiplication of each element of each field will result in the real number if and
only if the scale of that element is equal to the real number. For example, consider the case when the
Or
field of 2 and field of infinity are renamed as "x" and "y" respectively. And other similar fields "Z"
zero
and ed "q" are added to the representation then the theory suggest the validity of the following:
ya ‣ za * qa =3. Whereas if any of these element did deviate from the other the result will not be
X3
a "real number" but a "potential of existence" that can be result in the result in real number upon any
algebraic operations that set all the elements of all fields to be equal. This notion on the "harmonic
existence" that a real number emerge to existence only when a harmony of other fields
suggest equalizing over different ontological existence of these fields at the same time. are met can
[he representation in linear algebra: The conditions that result in having a real number upon matc
ofall elements of the fields of the ontological existence is not "causal" as the math is an abstraction.
Thus, the theory does not treat the field of the real numbers as any special case than the other fields. In
fact, the computational representation of the the theory of ontological algebra is more feasible when
1
representing the real number and the potential of existence as one vector. For example the vector
1] does represent the real number "2"
Whereas the vector [2, 3, does represent a real number "2" with additional potential existence of 0.
and Infe Which can be also equivalent to [6, 1, 2] since 0(3) * inf(3)=3
However, there is nothing special in the vector operation about the real field. That is to say, the real
is
OF
field could be represented as the second or the third element of the vector. Thus, this suggest a further
generalization of the the harmonic ontological algebra special operation in vector multiplications.  vector multiplication of the harmonic ontological algebra: When applying any operations over
anv two numbers that are represented as vectors, there is a "prior" of choosing the index that represent
the basis of the calculations (or in the traditional sense of the theory, the real number). By doing so, the
the operation over two vectors (or two ontological numbers) will follow these steps:
1- get the value of the preset index.
Of
2- divide all the elements of the vectors by that value. 3- carry out the operation of the two vectors element wise.
or
I- re-calculated the existence of real components by estimating the matched numbers of all element
the field.
5- Consider the remained unmatched numbers of each element of the vector as "potential existence".
The entangled representation of numbers:
This theory suggests that there are vectors that maintain an equivalency of existence across different
ields. For example, upon changing the considered index of the vector that is used as a basis of carrying
out the calculation, the result will be a new vector hat is equivalent to another vector that represent an
equivalent existence in another field of a different index. Nevertheless, the fact that there can be
different representations of the "existence" and ""potential of existence" in the same field may suggest
that there can be an equivalency of a set of vectors 01 one field to another set of vector of another field.
to
'otential application of this theory: Many physical phenomenon does show the effect the uncertaint
and eauivalency Thus, the ontological algebraic calculation can have the potential to contribute to
representing and calculating such physical dynamic upon generalizing over classic mathematical
notions that still consider that undermined of many operations that involves zero and infinity.