Summarize:

The researcher’s measurement choice nonlinearly scales per- 
formance, causing performance to change sharply and unpredictably in a manner that qualitatively 
matches published emergent abilities (inset). (D) If the researcher instead scores models’ outputs 
using a discontinuous metric such as (Multiple Choice Grade, which is similar to a step function), 
the researcher’s measurement choice discontinuously scales performance, causing performance to 
changesharplyandunpredictablyinamannerthatqualitativelymatchespublishedemergentabilities 
(inset). (E)Changingfroma nonlinearmetrictoalinear metric (suchasTokenEditDistance), model 
shows smooth, continuous and predictable improvements, ablating the emergent ability. (F) Chang- 
ing from a discontinuous metric to a continuous metric (e.g. Brier Score) again reveals smooth, 
continuous and predictable improvements in task performance, ablating the emergent ability. Con- 
sequently, emergent abilities may be creations of the researcher’s analyses, not fundamental changes 
in model family behavior on specif i c tasks. 
To communicate our alternative explanation, we present it as a simple mathematical model and 
demonstrate how it quantitatively reproduces the evidence offered in support of emergent abilities 
of LLMs. We then test our alternative explanation in three complementary ways: 
1. We make, test and conf i rm three predictions based on our alternative hypotheses using the 
InstructGPT [24] / GPT-3 [3] model family. 
2. We meta-analyze published results from [8, 29, 34], and show that in the space of task- 
metric-model family triplets, emergent abilities only appear for certain metrics and not for 
model families on tasks (columns). We further show that on i xed model outputs, changing 
the metric causes the emergence phenomenon to disappear. 
3. We intentionally induce emergent abilities in deep neural networks of different architec- 
tures on multiple vision tasks (which to the best of our knowledge have never before been 
demonstrated) to show how similar metric choices can induce seemingly emergent abilities. 
3