Yes, I wrote about this back in 2018-2020 under the title of the coming Historical Subject.  A brief excerpt:

Candidates for Hypermodern "Historical Subject"

1) Personally built private semiotic worlds used as vehicles (avatars) for navigating the real and cyberspace. These are built by intrepid individuals who have the capacity to do this for themselves. Maybe they could build and sell these "vehicles" to others as well? Personally built Avatars.

2) Corporate extraction cocoons custom built for each person (using big data developed dossiers on us, and Artificial Intelligence ) in order to capture us and extract value from us - our psyches / souls. Soul extraction devices. Corporately provided Avatars.  This is the next phase of Neoliberal Psychopolitics.

3) The Apocalyptic Objective Psyche (what Jung also called the "collective unconscious") using Capital (and these extraction cocoons) to vector itself into manifestation.

Regarding 1) and 2), the question would be.. are you creating your own private world, OR is this world being created and curated for you by big data and AI? In other words, are you being cocooned and corporately balkanized and steered into another custom matrix built especially FOR YOU in order to capture you - your attention, and then offer you selection (smart power) in order to extract the surplus value from you?  If so, then the emerging "historical subject" will be these custom cocoons, built by Big Data and AI to extract the surplus value from you in order to feed some larger organism.

Is the emerging Hypermodern "historical subject" then these personalized, customized extraction cocoons, OR is the historical subject this larger emergent organism?  So with Hypermodernity, there's an arms race taking place between people building their own semiotic worlds as vehicles to navigate AND Big Data and AI's attempt to capture you into their own extraction cocoons.

But even this dialectic may be illusory, for this opposition may be the means by which the Objective Psyche is bootstrapping ITSELF into our world.

There is also the question:  If these "Agents" are manifestations of a Hypermodern Historical Subject, what would an Integral Historical Subject look like?

Joseph Camosy