Digital learning trails: Scaling technology-facilitated 
curricular innovation in schools with a rhizomatic lens 
Azilawati Jamaludin1•David Wei Loong Hung1 
Published online: 8 August 2016 
? Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2016 
Abstract Technological advances in the form of ubiquitous computing has altered 
the learning landscape today. Contemporary modes of learning afford curricular 
innovations in schools. While learning journeys of decades ago entailed i eld trips to 
places of interest such as museums and zoos where students completed tasks or 
worksheets after each trip, the learning journeys of today are facilitated by tech- 
nological tools such as smart devices and global positioning systems. Learners are 
moving away from being mere content consumers through technology-facilitated 
dialoguing and content creation (Tay and Lee 2014; Tan et al. 2011). In this paper 
we unpack tenets of a technology-facilitated curricular innovation (CI) through a 
case study analysis of the development and implementation of a Digital Learning 
Trails (DLT) project. Through tracing the trajectory of the DLT project, we identify 
factors related to the scalability and sustainability of this CI that was developed in 
one school and subsequently used by more than 200 schools in Singapore. We posit 
that scaling curricular innovations in schools can be conceptually provisioned 
through a rhizomatic lens where innovation is characterized by multiple trajectories, 
allowing for recontextualizations of CIs. We argue that, (1) the pedagogic process in 
the context of education and scaling is based on supporting apprentice-schools to 
make multiple recontextualizations; (2) the enculturation process of a school 
adopting and implementing a particular innovation is based on a rhizomatic rather 
than linear, conception of the development of expertise; and (3) the process of CI 
implementation is based on developing the capability to not only make multiple 
& Azilawati Jamaludin 
azilawati.j@nie.edu.sg 
David Wei Loong Hung 
david.hung@nie.edu.sg 
1 National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore 
123 
J Educ Change (2016) 17:355–377 
DOI 10.1007/s10833-016-9280-x 
recontextualizations but also to accumulate enough capital to send out new ‘roots 
and shoots’ as it spreads. 
Keywords Curricular innovations ? Digital trails ? Education reform ? Innovation 
diffusion ? Scale and sustainability 
Introduction 
In an era of exponential change in the pace and scope of economic and political 
developments across the globe, tandem shifts are requisite