The voices change more rapidly in this part of the Aniara poetry cycle and Poem 79 is a look back at all the travellers from a bright and fertile planet and the narrator says “God and Satan hand in hand” fled in these deranged and poisoned lands from man, “a king in an ashen crown” (Poem 79).
Poem 80 changes tone again and describes the gentle fertility of the home planet that was sustained by the same furnace sun that now can be seen plainly from Aniara. Just as nature is nurtured by sunlight, humans should have understood the lesson to be good and not bring down the sun of nuclear war on the land.
Poem 81 charts the rise of the dark in the minds of the Aniara travellers after nineteen years, although the narrator now works on scientific theories with Isagel, who is his companion as the ship drove on “with its hull full of scars” (Poem 81).
The High Command of Aniara has the whole crew and all the travellers dress up in their best for a ritual to celebrate the Cosmic Way, like a shipload of passengers crossing the equator on Earth. When the survivors were together for the event they notices how hard the years had been on them. The Chief Goldondier gave a speech to mark the occasion of the twentieth year of travel and then the narrator notes that, “suddenly someone said / a light-year is a grave” (Poem 81), meaning that just one light year is too great a distance for a human being.  The narrator says the twenty years of the journey were, “sixteen hours of a light-path / on the sea of the light-year grave. /Then none of us were laughing” (Poem 82) The poem ends with the forceful line, “A light-year is a grave.” (Poem 82)
‘The Song of Erosion’ is Poem 83, very similar to Shelley’s ‘Ozymandius’ (1818) that mocks the pride of the priests, kings and rulers for their lavish statues and rituals that are all reduced to dust. This fine poem in the Aniara cycle brings back the memories of the strange rituals of the cults onboard Aniara and how the twenty year voyage has eroded their strength and meaning entirely.
Poem 84 returns to the Chief Astronomer who is lecturing the Aniara travellers and shows an image of as distant galaxy and the narrator tells us some of the listeners pray to the image on their knees as they are members of the “galactave religion” (Poem 84) and the narrator stressed the visual impact of the image by saying it is like seeing a goldfish magnified in a bowl.
As in earlier poems, Poem 85 starts by declaring that words are not equal to the task of describing space with the fine example, “The galaxy swings around / like a wheel of lighted smoke, / and the smoke is made of stars. / It is sunsmoke. / For lack of other words we call it sunsmoke, / do you see. ” (Poem 85) The richest of all languages cannot describe the immensity of the universe.

Poem 86 is the ‘Song from Gond’ and it seems to be placed in the cycle by the narrator as it relates directly to the ageing travellers on the Aniara, the transience of human life in comparison to the universe, and in this poem’s case to the gods. This is a shorter poem in rhyme and meter, keeping in translation and form from Martinson’s original.
Following on from the appreciation of the short cycle of human birth and death comes Poem 87 that depicts again in the narrator’s voice how the static world of Aniara causes the travellers to move through stages, through fleeting fashions and strange superstitions. When a star draws nearer Isagel asks the narrator if they should plunge Aniara into the sun but the narrator says to wait, showing this couple’s deep depression.
Poem 88 carries on from the glimpse of despair seen in Poem 87 with Isagel’s madness. She hears the Mima speak to her and call her by name and her fine, Mathematical mind now craves death. The narrator says she “slipped away to where / the Laws of Aleph Numbers all are stored” (Poem 89) He notes, “When someone you have loved has reached death’s door / space stands harder and more brutal than before.” (Poem 89)
Poem 90 tells of how during Aniara’s long voyage the narrator is taken by some of Chefone’s gang and locked in a low cellar room. He believes he will be released when someone is needed for the ship with scientific skills and his prediction comes true rapidly. The narrator speaks to his dead partner, Isagel, from his confinement and now believes Isagel was the Mima’s soul. Chefone releases the narrator and he returns to Mima’s hall, perhaps to be closer to Isagel.
In Poem 91 it is clear the problem with Aniara is the artificial gravity and its malfunction means the travellers feel as if they are continually falling. The narrator uses his scientific skills and the normal gravity is restored.
Poem 92 returns to the Mima again and its meaning in the lives of the Aniara travellers, perhaps because the narrator is living back with the broken relic of the Mima. He sees that there are some travellers who still worship the broken Mima and their cult is so extreme that they even practise human sacrifice. Even these killings seem lukewarm to the narrator and others, who remember the visuals of the end of their homeworlds in nuclear holocaust.  They are so jaded and emotionless that they refuse to perform one of the rituals Chefone designed, that “thrasonical / bullet-headed breaker of mankind” (Poem 92).
Chefone’s response to their slight was to have the priests of the religion killed brutally in the Mima halls where the rituals were performed. This makes the Aniara travellers stay away from the halls and even Chefone realises his time is over. At the end of Poem 93 the narrator is himself surprised that Chefone changes his ways and helps the sick “and tried to warm the freezing” (Poem 93)
The title of Poem 94 is ‘Death Certificate’ and with this poem the narrator announces Chefone’s demise and lambasts him as an “ill-willed hateful self-devourer” and a ” froth-mouthed feeder” (Poem 94).