
It was a lecture:


Process Physics: An organismic
neo-Whiteheadian physics
(International Whitehead Conference
2017)

https://youtu.be/DB-jktr-BrI?si=tmS7aEfTXu5GQ5ue

12
Likes
503
Views
2020
Jul 19
Universidad de las Azores

Process Physics is a new way of doing physics
that has been developed by Australian professor
of physics Reg Cahill and his co-workers. It very
much agrees with Lee Smolin's line of reasoning
(2019) that our modeling of nature should be a
relational monadology, just as envisioned by
Newton's main opponent Gottfried Leibniz.
Smolin holds that a lot of our problems in
contemporary physics come from our Newtonian
way of 'doing physics in a box'. This is a way of
doing physics which isolates our target of
observation from the rest of the universe
(including the observer) and then problematically
extrapolates its findings to nature-as-a-whole.
In contrast, Process Physics can be
characterized as a neo-Whiteheadian,
habit-centered, biocentric way of doing physics
without a box. It starts out with an initially
undifferentiated homogeneity of noisy,
self-organizing background processuality which
gradually turns out to give rise to an ever-more
complex network of dynamically evolving
relationships. It does so by setting up a
stochastic, self-reference-based modeling of
nature in which all self-referential and initially
noisy activity patterns are 'mutually in-formative'
in the sense that they are actively making a
meaningful difference to each other (i.e
in-forming or 'actively giving shape to each
other). In this way, the system evolves from its
initial featurelessness to then 'branch out' to
higher and higher levels of complexity - all this
according to roughly the same basic principles as
naturally developing neural networks or slime
mold foraging patterns (Burchett et al. 2020).
Because of this self-organizing and noise-driven
branching behaviour, the thus emerging relational
network can be thought of as habit-bound with a
potential for creative novelty and open-ended
evolution. Furthermore, three-dimensionality,
(quasi-)classical behaviour, and gravitational,
relativistic and inertial effects are spontaneously
emergent features within this evolving web of
interrelations. Also, the network's constantly
renewing activity patterns bring along an inherent
present moment effect, thereby reintroducing
time as the system's becomingness'
As a final point, subjectivity - in the form of
mutual informativeness' (which is also used in
Gerald Edelman's and Giulio Tononi's extended
theory of neuronal group selection to explain how
higher-order consciousness can emerge) - is a
naturally evolving, innate feature, not a
coincidental, later-arriving side-effect or epiphenomenon.
