Ok that is a lot of reading. What about research on the similarity between LLMs and how infants learn grammar and semantics through statistical pattern finding, babbling on all random human-producible sounds, and waving their arms somewhat at random, until they accidentally say or do something interesting, which rewards that behavior, and flows from general to specialized, like in the first article on practopoeisis we discussed earlier. If it were not the case babies would not learn spoken languages and sign language. I am also reminded of the book The First Idea, by shankar and Greenspan, which studies similarity began primates and children in learning language. Also, this recent study seems related: Humans can understand apes' sign language, new study finds By Issy Ronald and Amarachi Orie, CNN Updated 12:52 PM EST, Thu January 26, 2023 (CNN)From pointing to animated arm movements and nodding, people regularly employ gestures to accompany and create language. Now, it's been suggested that humans can also understand sign language used by apes, meaning humans may retain an understanding of ape communication from their ancestors. Great apes deploy more than 80 signals to communicate everyday goals, according to a study published Tuesday in the journal PLOS Biology. Towards a great ape dictionary: Inexperienced humans understand common nonhuman ape gestures Kirsty E. Graham, Catherine Hobaiter Abstract In the comparative study of human and nonhuman communication, ape gesturing provided the first demonstrations of flexible, intentional communication outside human language. Rich repertoires of these gestures have been described in all ape species, bar one: us. Given that the majority of great ape gestural signals are shared, and their form appears biologically inherited, this creates a conundrum: Where did the ape gestures go in human communication? Here, we test human recognition and understanding of 10 of the most frequently used ape gestures. We crowdsourced data from 5,656 participants through an online game, which required them to select the meaning of chimpanzee and bonobo gestures in 20 videos. We show that humans may retain an understanding of ape gestural communication (either directly inherited or part of more general cognition), across gesture types and gesture meanings, with information on communicative context providing only a marginal improvement in success. By assessing comprehension, rather than production, we accessed part of the great ape gestural repertoire for the first time in adult humans. Cognitive access to an ancestral system of gesture appears to have been retained after our divergence from other apes, drawing deep evolutionary continuity between their communication and our own. 

