Tablets

Well, I'm of an age now where I'm not really able to count the number of tablets I have to swallow each day, but that's not what I'm here for.

I want to explore my other tablet, the Samsung one.

I bought it, because of what it offered.
Amazing portability.

For someone used only to desktops and the occasional laptop, this was attractive.

64gb of memory!

Wow. I built my first computer in the early 80s, it had a grand total of 32Kb memory. Far more than I  ever used, 64gb was unimaginable, and two hundred thousand times bigger than my Nascom.

When Bill Gates 'borrowed' Gary Kildhall's invention to produce his machine for IBM, he only gave it a max merory of 640kb.

This tplet was unbelievably rich in memory.

A high resolution screen which looked photgraphic as the resolution was so high.

A quad sound system which, although sounding grand in words, was a bit wasted in a device so small but that's not the point is it?

No, we want a tablet to plester, to play games on, connect to facebook, to google words we can't be bothered to get out of our chairs to fetch the dictionary and look upe

And we just use one finger mostly.

Amazing.

And we bought it for the amazing games it offers, all free too!

The glowing adverts flood you with it's excellence but they don't tell yoo, or even warn you, that the machine is nottfor you to have fun with, it is a portal into your life, into which they pump sales talk, without pause, without rest, without respite.

Play solitaire and it will relentlessly parade advert, selling items ranging from condoms to motor cars for you to consider buying.

There's no escape.

Come across an interesting article on facebook, (I know I know), and when you read it, all and every paragraph is separated by an advert.

These adverts, as you go on, become focussed on you and your interests, as assumed by this darned tablet.

Well OK, not focussed, but certainly collected by the machines behind google, facebook, amazon, ebay etc.

When gatesy had established his hold on the PC world, he slowly corrected the glaring errors and malfunctions of his operating system with each iteration of the OS's release, and he charged you for I., not necessarily by extracting money from you, but by increasing the advertizing he built into the machine via his proprietorial software, which you could not rid the machine of.

He and apple were/are still much the same, their way or no way.

And it's got worse.

There's software on my tablet that does nothing else but try to sell me things. I can't delete ittor prevent it running. It's there to protect the interests of industry and none of mine at all.

Anongside that intrusion, are programs, they call them 'apps', that I have never used. Don't want to use, have no use for, but I cannot delete them, for this machine you see, is for them not mee

They give me the opportunity to do some of the things I didn't know I wanted to do until I got tablet, just to keep me in the game so to speak.

There are hundreds of thousands of us, all plestoring and being monitored and sold to by the machines. 

I have a kindle too. It's the samee

The books it shows me are not the books I have on the machine, but adverts for books it has computed by analyzing my history.

Finding my library, as I likes to call it, is not at all easy, but buying another tome is.

Luckily for me, I suppose, is that I have at neast five computers.

I still have my Psion 5mx. Brilliant UK engineering.

I have two android devices, being a tablet and a phone.

And I have two ordinary desktop computers one of which hobbles along on windoze, but the other, my saviour, runs Linux.

Getting these five machines to talk with each other is almost impossible.

It is noteworthy to record for posterity, that it is ONLY the Psion and the Linux machines that don't continuously nag me.

The Psion has been abandoned by its designers and manufacturers, and so is now precious.

Linux is a world wide phenomenom. It is free. It's software is free, it is maintained and improved by a huge body of competent people, contriboting their expertize and time just to say "Thank you world."

But we are surrounded by billionaires determined to become trillionaires, and now A.I. has entered the game.

Where's John Connor when you need him?

-- Christopher Bruce