Computational Biology and Chemistry

Volume 103, April 2023, 107820

Where is the mind within the brain? Transient selection of subnetworks by metabotropic receptors and G protein-gated ion channels

Author links open overlay panelDankoNikolićabc

Show more

Outline

Share

Cite

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2023.107820Get rights and content

Highlights

•

Connectionist paradigm suffers from the scaling problem and hence, a new paradigm is needed.

•

G protein-gated ion channels (GPGICs) close or open branches of dendritic trees and axon terminals, transiently re-routing neural activity.

•

Metabotropic receptors (MRs) have the capacity to learn the conditions under which GPGICs need to be activated.

•

Mental operations may solely be executed by the functions of MRs and GPGICs.

Abstract

Perhaps the most important question posed by brain research is: How the brain gives rise to the mind. To answer this question, we have primarily relied on the connectionist paradigm: The brain’s entire knowledge and thinking skills are thought to be stored in the connections; and the mental operations are executed by network computations. I propose here an alternative paradigm: Our knowledge and skills are stored in metabotropic receptors (MRs) and the G protein-gated ion channels (GPGICs). Here, mental operations are assumed to be executed by the functions of MRs and GPGICs. As GPGICs have the capacity to close or open branches of dendritic trees and axon terminals, their states transiently re-route neural activity throughout the nervous system. First, MRs detect ligands that signal the need to activate GPGICs. Next, GPGICs transiently select a subnetwork within the brain. The process of selecting this new subnetwork is what constitutes a mental operation – be it in a form of directed attention, perception or making a decision. Synaptic connections and network computations play only a secondary role, supporting MRs and GPGICs. According to this new paradigm, the mind emerges within the brain as the function of MRs and GPGICs whose primary function is to continually select the pathways over which neural activity will be allowed to pass. It is argued that MRs and GPGICs solve the scaling problem of intelligence from which the connectionism paradigm suffers.

Graphical abstract

￼

Download : Download high-res image (148KB)

Download : Download full-size image

Previous

Next 

Keywords

Scaling problem

Explanatory gap

Connectionism

Metabotropic receptors

G protein-gated ion channels

Practopoiesis

Recommended articles

Cited by (0)

View full text

© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

￼

About ScienceDirect

Remote access

Shopping cart

Advertise

Contact and support

Terms and conditions

Privacy policy

We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.

￼


