Philip van Nedervelde As someone with aphantasia, I think articles like this are a bit ridiculous.

The author thinks imagining a bicycle floating across the sky is easy and normal, but to me that sounds impossible.

None of my thoughts ever cause any kind of physical sensation like an image or a sound, so it seems odd to equate it with memory, imagination, or thought.

Of course I have all kinds of ways to remember things and to plan things, just none have ever involved anything like an image. I would be extremely surprised to see a bicycle flying across the sky.

The idea of a memory as a flashback or image seems as incomprehensible to me as using it for imagining things.

It took me like 20 years to discover that anyone actually saw images in their head, it think it was probably through reading Galton's 1890 study on mental imagery.

It just seems ridiculous to me like a video game or a movie in your head is what it sounds like to me, and it sounds impossible, but I can imagine it

It definitely does not feel like I am missing, I think I can remember things faster and more accurately then I could if I ever had to picture it.

It does not seem necessary to have to picture things in order to think of them, it sounds like it would be distracting and inefficient.

It is possible that for me thinking of kind of like a spreadsheet, except there are no numbers or cells, and there isnt a two dimensional plain. If I change certain parameters, other parameters change, and there are logical sequences of steps like a directed acyclic graph or something, although those all seem like very visual metaphors.

It seems that I might think of right by slightly clenching the right side of my body or leaning right, and if I think of a wide open space I straighten my body and look to the horizon, like I am ready to survey and explore, and I might think of a closed space by cowering and clenching slightly. I think of most tools by imagining the muscle movements to interact with it. For example, if I am thinking of a mug, and I start feeling like I am planning out the muscle movements needed to reach out and grab it. If I am thinking of going to buy coffee, I start thinking about my coat and my wallet, and then where I am going to go.

Anyways, none of it ever seems to involve anything like an image, I could do this while pacing back and forth, staring at a blank sheet of paper, or watching a movie, it seems it would be an irrelevant detail.





