The Capacity for Moral Self-Correetion in Large
Language Models
Deep Ganguli ; Amanda Askell; Nicholas Schiefer, Thomas Liao, Kamile Lukosiate
[cs.CL] 15 Feb 2023
Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Catherine Olsson, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain,
Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jackson Kernion., Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller,
Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Karina Nguyen, Liane Lovit, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage.
Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Sandipan Kundu,
Saurav Kadavath, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer EI Showk, Tamera Lanham,
Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds,
Ben Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown,
Christopher Olah, Jack Clark, Samuel R. Bowman, Jared Kaplan
Anthropic
arXiv:2302.07459v]
Abstract
We test the hypothesis that language models trained with reinforcement learning from hu
man feedback (RLHF) have the capability to "morally self-correct"-to avoid producing
the
harmful outputs一if instructed to do so We find strong cvidence 1n support of this hy-
pothesis across three diferent experiments. each of which reveal different facets of moral
Self-correction. We find that the capability for moral self-correction emerges at 22B model
Parameters:, and [ypically improves with increasing model size and RLHF training. We
believe that at this level of scale, language models obtain two capabilities that they can use
or moral self-corection: (1) they can follow instructions and (2) they can learn comple,
normative concepts of harm like stereotyping, bias, and discrimination. As such, they can
follow instructions to avoid certain kinds ot morally harmful
We believe
outputs.
our re-
sults are cause for cautious optimism regarding the ability to train language models to abide
by ethical principles
Introduction
Large language models cxhibit harmful social biases [1l, 6, &, 11. 15, 24, 29, 50, 61] that can sometimes get
worse for larger models [2. 18. 20. 43]. At the same time, scaling model size can increase model performance
on a wide array of tasks [12, 25, 58]. Here, we combine these two observations to formulate a simple
ay pothesis: larger models may have the capability to moraly self-correct--to avoid producing harmfu
outputs-if instructed to do so. Our hypothesis Is not entirely new (see $2 for related work , especially
51, 63]) but we believe our experiments anq results are. We fnd that the capacity for moral self-correction
emerges at 22B model parameters, and that we can steer sufficiently large models to avoid harmful outputs
avoid harmfinl oupus
simply by instrueting models to
we test our hypotesis with three experiments ($3) that measure the propcnsity for large language models to
use negative stereotypes or to discriminate based on protected demographic attributes. We study language