I was just trying to be concise. By inspectors I mean anyone who enters the building to look around, welfare, police. I mentioned every possible factor, nothing phases him.

If it's about insurance, he will just argue how he already told Dave to leave he's tried to find him a friend's basement for a night. He will make promises to not bring anyone into the house, if that's a concern. Just mention any factors  that bother you and he will tell to address them. 

Don't mention my mental health because he acts like an energy vampire, all he wants to do is make it emotional and personal.

This is why he acts offended that it's on paper, he would prefer a face to face conversation first, then phone call, then text.

If he won't accept the note on face value, he wants to get more reasons out of you so he can make it a battle.

He wants to make it about being a friend of the family, if you mention my mental health he will give excuses as well, but for him that means that I don't want him around but am trying to use you to get him out.

If there is something bothering you he will try to address it, but he wants to feel offended and hurt so he wants to think that either me or you are  attacking him, that we don't like him personally.

I am not sure if you can hold your ground without turning it into a heated battle. If you just don't answer your phone he will do everything to get to speak to you in person. 

I am thinking it is important just to state your reasons, but if he offers to do every possible thing and you still want him out, then it is a personal attack on his character and on our friendship.

He doesn't exactly act reasonable, since he should just take it as a subtle hint and leave it that. He should want to not pry into the reason in order to not disturb things.

Best case scenario would him have been him just saying ok, and starting to make plans. He doesn't really care about your mental health or mine, or else he would have noticed years ago that his behavior makes me act a bit distressed.

If he feels personally attacked it will try to take down my mental health and yours by making it into a long and protracted battle.

This is why I think the best course of action is just talking to him, state a few more concerns if you have them, and he will try to address them.

Just take whatever terms he gives it, he doesn't have any clue that sometimes he makes promises without keeping them, if it is about that, he will take that as a huge personal insult as a person, and act offended, and try to make me and you into enemies, drag in more family and friends.

He would love a big round table discussion with everyone in person but I don't want to give him that, because he will try to use it to his advantage.

If you try just not answering your calls,  he will spend a month begging me to talk to you, to get you to talk to me, he will come out to car each day until he can talk to you into person, it will be a war of attrition, and it will be emotionally damaging and difficult for everyone.

If you want him out really bad you will have to continually give more reasons, but he he will scan for any particular phrase that I might have used so it will sound like my argument if you use any exact words, so he will try to attack me for putting you up to it and using manipulative tactics to try to demonize me because he wants to think that I am personally feeling attacked by him, so that he can make it an emotional battle.

You can give as many reasons as you like he will hyperanalyse them, he is acting like Peter or Pat, he would use any tactic he can to continue staying longer so that is not a rational reaction and can't exactly be reasoned with.

Last night I could think of lots of ways to get him out, fake an insanity attack, throw all the stuff in the backyard, I am trying to think of a solution that doesn't make him feel vindictive and hurt, and want to destroy things, some of my solutions would seem psychopathic, cruel, and machine-like to him, but it is too late to that on my own, if you can think of other reasons that will make him change his mind then mention them, I think I gave him dozens more reasons but if he is willing to make it a battle he will try to compare all my reasons and yours, he will look for inconsistencies.

This is why I think you should just give him what he wants, I don't want to start an all out war. He will try to drag other people in, he will try to wear both you and me down, it could become messy.

Just try to minimize damage, after he comes back from his trip, he can decide where he wants to move.

You can offer a storage unit, but he will take that as a sign that it is about his personality and character, if you have other reasons you don't want to talk about and he will try to drag them out of you.

You asked him to leave, he didn't want to, which means that he isn't going to act reasonable and I don't want a war. If he leaves for his own reasons and when he is ready it will be far more tolerable and far more peaceful.

I don't want you dragged into his emotional mind games. Just talk to him and let him find a solution. If he thinks it's the landlord or the system trying to get him out he might become even more unhinged.

Just try to minimize damage, I can handle his ridiculous behavior but he wants to make it an emotional war so he can control the outcome, but he won't care how many people he damages in the process so it is not a good solution.

