 mention one:

   Beagle Library:     Southey, Robert. 1810-19. History of Brazil. 3 vols. London: Longman, Hurst, Rees and Orme. Volume 2.   Text

the example of Solano: he had run through Tucuman and great part of the Chaco; he had baptized multitudes, and yet, though he was still living, scarcely did a trace remain of all his labours. The word was like the good seed; it sufficed not for the sower to scatter it, and then go his way, leaving it to chance; the seed that was sown must carefully be watched until the harvest. This opinion was too reasonable to be controverted. The missionaries nevertheless represented, that in what they had

 unfolding her beauties to the sun some

MENTION two

CUL-DAR91.114-118    Note:    c.1827   It can be proved most indisputably at what time the Christian Religion   Text   Image

by foretelling that the effect of their religion would be so entirely contrary to its precepts. 3rd that the religion should spread itself far wide. an original idea, for the Jews never imagined that there was any chance for their religion being promulgated. thus: again that it should increase gradually, how it was to be received is remarkably shown in the parable of the sower: many other parable show this, also how different the lives of Christians are from their faith:— The wonderful insight






By MICHAEL POTEMRA

July 11, 2011 7:07 AM

And that’s how I found myself meditating on this sower, who represents God — and yet doesn’t seem to be very careful in what he is doing. “Some seed fell by the way side . . . some fell upon stony places . . . some fell among thorns. . . .” At the implications of this, my neo-Calvinist heart bridles. Is this negligent sower meant to represent the same God who careth for the fall of a sparrow? And then it occurred to me: Perhaps the Jesus who initially preached this parable was aware, as the rest of mankind became some 18 centuries later, of the process of evolution — in which what appear to us to be various dead ends and randomnesses are quite common? Indeed, in my own understanding of theology, Jesus — as the Logos through Whom the universe came to be — must have been aware of the process of evolution, since He was present at and integral to its creation. But I was brought up rather short by His pointing to it in this way.

Did Saint Francis Discover Evolution Before Darwin? Did Jesus (in the Parable of the Sower)?

Posted on January 14, 2014 by Santi Tafarella


The following saying has been attributed to Saint Francis:

Start by doing what’s necessary; then do what’s possible; and suddenly you are doing the impossible.

I’m reasonably confident it’s not remotely close to anything that Francis actually said–it’s obviously motivational dreck attached to Francis’s name–so, no, Francis probably didn’t land upon the secret of how evolution works before Darwin.

But what strikes me in the above quote is just how crisply it captures, quite unintentionally, Darwin’s insight surrounding evolution by natural selection.

So, in a sense, if Francis ever said anything like the above, he stumbled upon the whole evolutionary shebang before it “shebanged” in 1859 (with the publication of The Origin of Species), for life is, indeed, the cosmos’s way of exploring what is beyond necessity; that is, the contingent, the possible.

Put another way, a rock cannot be other than a rock and water cannot but flow downhill, but a living thing is “a river that flows uphill”; a local defier of entropy; a Columbus to the unmapped territory of possibility that runs contrary to whatever it is that entropy as a whole happens to be doing (gravitationally collapsing fuel-exhausted stars; dropping from melting glaciers great chunks of ice into dark seas, etc.).

[...]

So behold, the sower went out to sow some seed. That would be Francis of Assisi in his garden, preaching to his birds. Or God at the Big Bang. Or, if God does not exist, the blind watchmaker of time, chance, and selection.

Here, once more, is the recipe for making a world that evolves. If Francis really said it, good for him!

Start by doing what’s necessary; then do what’s possible; and suddenly you are doing the impossible.

The impossible is the gradual accumulation of the possible.



