I called it the mso 36, because there are 36 units or cells.

Here is an early prototype (some of the definitions are incorrect):

Approximately, it translates to the formation of cell-like structures within the observable and real universe, on all possible scales.

1. Ocularum – observable space, the particle horizon. An eye-shaped sphere centered on the observer, due to the speed of light.

2. Monoturn – the only-version, the uniturn or monoverse. Literal translation of “universe.” It means, “All there is,” or  “14 billion years.” Includes all multiverses, all metaverses.

3. Lamphron – dark matter. From Greek word for “clear.” A relatively weakly interacting particle formed in the early universe that neither absorbs nor emits light, yet can be seen through gravitational lensing or inferred through mathematical analysis of the rotational curves of galaxies and galaxy clusters.

4. Lamphrodyne – dark energy. The tendency for space to fall “outwards.” The feedback mechanism by which vacuum creates more vacuum, uniformly stretching space.

5. Graviton – the exchange particle of gravity. A very small fluctuation in the space-time field, that causes matter and energy to congeal; to pull together with a force that is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. The “stickiness of stuff.”

6. Quark – a very small elementary particle that has a fractional charge, various “flavors” called “color,” and always comes in “chunks.”

7. Electron – small, elementary particle with a negative charge which “orbits” or “piles onto” proton-neutron chunks and is responsible for electricity.

8. Lepton – a very small particle

9. Fermion – non-stacking, non-overlapping particles which make up matter.

10. Photon – the exchange particle of the electromagnetic force, a self-propagating disturbance in electric and magnetic field space. A wiggling electric field creates a magnetic field which creates an electric field, and so on. Travels at a maximum fixed velocity in a perfect vacuum.

11. Gluon – the exchange particle of the weak-force which helps glue quarks together.

12. Meson – middle particle, a quark and an antiquark.

13. Boson – stacking, overlapping particles which hold matter together. Includes force-exchange particles responsible for gravity and light.

14. Proton – two up-quarks and a down-quark.

15. Neutron – two down-quarks and an up-quark.

16. Baryon – ordinary matter; made from three quarks.

17. Hadron – a baryon or a meson.

18. Atom – a clump of positively-charged protons, usually with some stabilizing chargeless neutrons and some negatively-charged electrons.

19. Molecule – a clump of atoms.

20. Unit Cell – the smallest collection of atoms characteristic of a crystal lattice.

21. Crystal Lattice – the repetition in space of a unit cell.

22. Microbial – Microlife, invisible life

23. Megalobial – Macrolife, visible life.

24. Gaiama – the sum total of all lifeforms on the planet. The biosphere.

25. Technium – the sum total of all environments. Technology, per se. The mechabiome.

26. Tellus – the Earth

27. Gaiaselena Synestium – the earth-moon system. 

28. Solarum – the solar system. The local star, the sun, Sol, and all its planets and density variations zones, or solar-rings, which can be called Plyds. Formed from the protoplyd, Protosolarum.

29. Perinebula – local fluff, an interstellar cloud which Solarum is passing through.

30. Perivacuole – local bubble, an interstellar vacuity which Perinebula is passing through.

31. Orio-Cygno-Brachio – the Orion-Cygnus Arm.

32. Galacto – the Milky Way Galaxy. A relatively self-contained collection of stars, interstellar dusts and gases, and a lamphron halo.

33. Proxima Systada – the local group. A relatively self-contained collection of galaxies, including Andromeda and Galacto.

34. Virgo Supercluster – a relatively self-contained collection of galaxy clusters, including Proxima Systada.

35. Laniakea Supercluster – a relatively self-contained collection of galaxy clusters and superclusters, including Virgo.

36. Pisces-Cetus Filament – a strand or ligament of superclusters. The local galactic “landmass” or “wall.” A local density variation in comparison to neighbouring galactic voids or super-vacuums, which are Lamphrodyne “lakes.”

Cytosis – verb-formator suffix which indicates the formation of cells, by which I mean, relatively self-contained systems, on various scales.
