Unit Cell - the smallest collection of atoms characteristic of a crystal lattice. Crystal Lattice - the repetition in space of a unit cell. Microbial - a relatively self-contained collection of crystal lattices. Megalobial - a relatively self-contained collection of microbials. Megalobial Gaiama - the sum total of all lifeforms on the planet. The biosphere. Technium - the sum total of all environments. Technology, per se. The mechabiome. Tellus - the earth. From which we get words like "tellurian" and "terrestrial." Tellus Gaiaselene - the earth-moon system. Also known as Terra-luna and Gaiaterraearth-Selenalunamoona. Formed from Prototellus and Theia. Solarum - the solar system. The local star, the sun, Sol, and all its planets and density variations zones, or solar-rings, which can be called Plyds. Formed from the protoplyd, Protosolarum. Perinebula - local fluff, an interstellar cloud which Solarum is passing through. Perivacuole - local bubble, an interstellar vacuity which Perinebula is passing through. Orio-Cygno-Brachio - the Orion-Cygnus Arm. The local spur or spiral where Perivacuole is located. Galacto - the Milky Way Galaxy. A relatively self-contained collection of stars, interstellar dusts and gases, and a lamphron halo. Galacto Proxima Systada - the local group. A relatively self-contained collection of galaxies, including Andromeda and Galacto. Virgo Supercluster - a relatively self-contained collection of galaxy clusters, including Proxima Systada. Laniakea Supercluster - a relatively self-contained collection of galaxy clusters and superclusters, including Virgo. Pisces-Cetus Filament - a strand or ligament of superclusters. The local galactic "landmass" or "wall." A local density variation in comparison to neighbouring galactic voids or super-vacuums, which are Lamphrodyne "lakes." Which brings us back to Ocularum, observable space. Cytosis - verb-formator suffix which indicates the formation of cells, by which I mean, relatively self-contained systems, on various scales. . If you say it fast enough it leads to self-cognosis 