These LLM systems lack grounding in real-world physics, mechanics, and social interactions. Human languages have this, at least covertly, as part of a deeply coded form-meaning mapping system, overlain by a kind of encryption due to historical linguistic change(s). There is a special type of word type, called ideophones (among many other names), which is akin to onomatopoeia on steroids (and applied to many other semantic domains, not just sound imitation, but also to mental states, other sensory phenomena, postures, gaits, and so on). For example, Mongolic languages, which have thousands of such words (a good percentage of the total native (non-borrowed) lexicon), have strong associations in ideophones with shapes and textures. For example, most beginning with a /b/ connote smooth(ed), often rounded surfaces, with a lot of surface order, while those beginning with /s/ connote the idea of shagginess and disorder, where potentially or initially parallel linear elements start to lose their parallel orientations, with each element going its own way. Lots more here, and in many other languages. None of which has made its way into any LLM.

After pursuing a comparative study of ideophone segmental phonosemantic for the past 45 years, and looking closely at around 150 lanaguages, I can say (probably definitively) that the phonological system (the table of rows and columns of phonemes you'll find in most relatively comprehensive grammars of any language) act like 'periodic tables' of primitive meanings, having to do with the distribution of mass and energy over space and time, allowing for the depicting of forces, order and disorder, etc. I believe it highly likely that our distant ancestor hominids got this kind of mapping system by exapting a previously existing understanding of chewing and swallowing- each different tooth type (we have four) is specialized to apply different forces to food morsels of different material textures and at different orientation. Incisor teeth have their edges at pretty much right angles to the more distal teeth such as the molars, and they act like wedges and nippers. Canines are like crimpers, their points dimpling the surface of some object. Bicuspids/premolars are shears, able to separate fibrous materials either with or against the grain, and molars are crackers and crushers, ale to apply the greatest forces to more refractory materials, helped by their closeness to the jaw joint, which has the greatest mechanical 'lever arm'. As you work forward each next tooth type applies less and less force, but with greater spatiotemporal freedom and precision. Interestingly you see the same general progression in the fingers of the hand, with the thumb approximating the molars, and the pinky finger the incisors. This may help explain manual languages to some degree. Manual (signed) languages have so-called 'classifier' handshapes that seem to conform to ideophones in spoken languages. Variation in the classifiers, under fine control, can give subtle differences in connotation, just as similar variation in the phonological composition of an ideophone in a spoken language connotes similar subtle differences of meanings.

