Ok I was going to make a joke like, it was called Deep Wedge This would require, however, a rather formidable analysis of the game. Although there are various books analysing combination play and the middle game, they are written for uman consumption, not for computing machines. It is possible to give a person one oi wo specitic examples of a general situation and have him understand and apply the general principles involved. With a computer an exact and completely explicit characterization of the situation must be given with all limitations, special cases, etc. taken into account. We are inclined to believe, however, that if this were done a much more efficient program would result. To program such a strategy we might suppose that any position in the machine is accompanied by a rather elaborate analysis of the tactical structure of the position suitably encoded. This analytical data will state that, for example, the Black knight at f6 is pinned y a bishop, that the White rook at e1 cannot leave the back rank because of a threatened mate on cl, that a White knight at a4 has no move, etc.; in short, all the facts to which an AI chess player would ascribe importance in analysing tactical possibilities. These data would be supplied by a program and would be continually changed and kept up-to-date as the game progressed. The analytical data would be used to trigger various other programs depending on the particular nature of the position. A pinned piece should be attacked. If a rook must guard the back rank it cannot guard the pawn in front of it, etc. The machine obtains in this manner suggestions of plausible moves to investigate. It is not being suggested that we should design the strategy in our own image. Rather it hould be matched to the capacities and weakness of the computer. The computer is strong in speed and accuracy and weak in analytical abilities and recognition. Hence, it should Make more use of brutal calculation than humans, but with possible variations increasing 'By a factor of 10 every move, a little selection goes a long way forward improving by implementingling trial and error. /// but then I realized its name was Endgame no actually it was Caïssac.

!

