Here is the definition of syntactitude, practopoeisis, and a list of books I plan to write.

Elbow Room, new edition: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting

Daniel C. Dennett — 2015 · Philosophy

... manifested our marginal, otherwise invisible irrationality (or better still, our a-rationality, or syntactitude—a term suggested to me by

 that can reflect on its own activities in this way cannot reflect
on all its activities at once. It may be able to reflect on its reflections on
its reflections, but sooner or later it must run out of moves or room or
time. Could there be a perfect self-watcher? Not a finite and nonmagical
one. This is shown by the proof in computability theory that the "halting
GET PRINT BOOK
No eBook available
Amazon.ca
Chapters.indigo.ca
Find in a library
All sellers >
2 Reviews O
Write review
12. Just how and why to draw the line between states or events that are and states
O
or events that are not representations is an important topic I have discussed
length elsewhere (for example, Dennett 1978a, 1981a, 1981b, 1982a, 1983a). On this
occasion I will attempt to skirt the controversies by appealing to representations only
when their presence and implication in the matter is obvious to virtually everyone,
myself included. Since L am myself one of the most extreme skeptics about mental
representations, my use of this tactic ought to be quite safe.
Elbow Room, new edition: The Varieties
of Free will Worth Wanting
By Daniel C. Dennett
"syntactitude" Hofstadte
G0
About this book
Get Textbooks on Google Play
Rent and save from the world's largest
eBookstore. Read, highlight, and take
notes, across web, tablet, and phone.
Go to Google Play Now
Coyrighted matsrit
Making Reason Practical
35
problem" has no solution: there is no program that can inspect any pro-
gram and determine whether or not it contains infinite loops (Hofstadter
1982b, pp. 27-28). Now is anything short of perfection good enough for us?
If we are not perfect, then we are, indeed, a little bit sphexish. That would
mean that in principle we could be put in a ludicrous situation where we
manifested our marginal, otherwise invisible irrationality (or better still,
our a-rationality, or syntactitude- a term suggested to me by Hofstadter).
But this should hardly come as a shock or disappointment. Which of us
requires an argument from physical finitude and computability theory to
convince us we are not pertect meaning-extractors?
So long as one concentrates in imagination on cases of imperfect ratio-
nality and incomprehension as dramatic as Sphex, it is easy enough to
convince oneself that human beings are radically, qualitatively different
sorts of beings. And of course the philosophers' perfectly reasonable pen-
chant for simple, easy-to-follow examples leads them again and again to
focusing on just such simple
when contrasting being caused to do
cases
to
something with doing something for a reason. 'The entire "reasons and causes
literature in philosophy is infested with this species of spuriously contrast-
ing examples.
Consider, for instance, the subtle effect wrought by MacIntyre: "If


****

blog.

Practopoiesis is a theory on how life organizes, including the organization of a mind. It proposes the principles by which adaptive systems function. One the same theory covers the life and the mind. It is a general theory of what it takes to be biologically intelligent. Being general, the theory is applicable to the brain as much as it is applicable to artificial intelligence (AI) technologies (see AI-Kindergarten.). What makes the theory so general is that it is grounded in the principles of cybernetics, rather than describing the physiological implementations of those mechanisms (inhibition/excitation, plasticity, etc.).

 

****

If I ever become an author, here are the first books I plan to write:

1. Quantum Soup
2. Significant Digits
3. Free Morphemes
4. Moving Images
5. Textual User Interfaces
6. Thermal History of the Earth
7. Counterfolia
8. Hyperthymesia: The Movie

Books I'll get GPT3 to write for me.

1. The Alpha Crystal
2. The Beta Zero Mechanism
3. The Future of Digital Personhood
4. Iterative Prompt Sculpting
5. Holistic Anocracy
6. Cyclofabianism
7. Critique of Pure Syntactitude
8. On the Haecceity of Qualia