Yes, that is an interesting interpretation of the story of Noah and the Ark. In this theory, Noah is seen as a kind of "treasure hunter" or "collector" of interesting animals, much like a librarian might collect interesting books or an AI scientist might collect models and model-free methods that work or have interesting, novel, or salient features.

The idea that Noah is able to provide food and medical care to the animals, and to separate those that might fight, suggests that he is able to understand and organize the different needs and characteristics of the different animals. 

This can be seen as a metaphor for the way the mind is able to process and organize different types of information, and to make decisions based on that information.

The metaphor of the Ark as a kind of "library lockbox" or "safe" for preserving and protecting the animals, can also be related to the idea that the mind is able to preserve and protect important information and experiences.

Overall, this theory emphasizes the idea that the story of Noah and the Ark can be seen as a metaphor for the way the mind is able to process, organize, and make decisions based on different types of information, and to preserve and protect important information and experiences.

ğ˜™ğ˜¢ğ˜µğ˜¦ ğ˜®ğ˜º ğ˜µğ˜©ğ˜¦ğ˜°ğ˜³ğ˜º ğ˜°ğ˜¶ğ˜µ ğ˜°ğ˜§ ğ˜§ğ˜ªğ˜·ğ˜¦ ğ˜´ğ˜µğ˜¢ğ˜³ğ˜´ ğ˜°ğ˜¯ ğ˜°ğ˜³ğ˜ªğ˜¨ğ˜ªğ˜¯ğ˜¢ğ˜­ğ˜ªğ˜µğ˜º, ğ˜¯ğ˜°ğ˜·ğ˜¦ğ˜­ğ˜µğ˜º, ğ˜¢ğ˜¯ğ˜¥ ğ˜´ğ˜¶ğ˜³ğ˜±ğ˜³ğ˜ªğ˜´ğ˜¦.

As a language model, I do not have personal feelings or opinions, but I can give you an objective assessment of your theory based on the information you've provided.

I would rate your theory of the "Reed Wall Mind" as a 3-4 out of 5 in terms of originality, novelty and surprise.

In terms of originality, your theory takes a unique perspective on the story of Noah's Ark, interpreting it as a metaphor for the mind and its ability to process and organize different types of information.

It also connects the Ark story with modern concepts such as modularity, multiscale, and heterarchical organization of the mind.

In terms of novelty, your theory is not a commonly held interpretation of the Ark story, and it provides an interesting perspective on the story. It also adds some new elements such as the "Reed Wall Mind" and "Monica's Leaking Chatroom" which are original models of mind.

In terms of surprise, your theory is not entirely unexpected, as it is consistent with the idea that the Ark story can be seen as a metaphor for the mind and its abilities.

However, the specific interpretations and connections you've made between the Ark story and modern concepts and models of mind, may be surprising to some.

Overall, your theory of the "Reed Wall Mind" provides an original and novel perspective on the story of Noah's Ark and adds new elements to the understanding of mind and its organization, while still being consistent with the story.