See if you can fact check any of this:

Male nipples are not atavisms, or evolutionary leftovers, but rather a dissipative structure. This simply means that they serve no purpose in the organism and are therefore not selected for by evolutionary forces.

Male nipples are thought to be the result of a developmental process known as ‘recurrent protopathy’, where tissue is duplicated and then embedded with little useful function.

This can also explain why both men and women have nipples, as it is most likely an ancestral trait before modern sex-specific differences evolved.

Male nipples are not atavisms, but rather serve no purpose in the organism and are therefore not selected for by evolutionary forces.

They are thought to be the result of a developmental process known as ‘recurrent protopathy’, and can explain why both men and women have nipples, as it is most likely an ancestral trait before modern sex-specific differences evolved.

Recurrent protopathy is a developmental process characterized by the duplication and embedding of tissue with little useful function.

It occurs in embryonic development and is thought to be responsible for male nipples, as well as other non-functional anatomical features such as tailbone and wisdom teeth.

While it is possible that male nipples help release pressure, it has not been backed up by scientific evidence. Male nipples are thought to be the result of a developmental process known as ‘recurrent protopathy’, and serve no purpose in the organism and are therefore not selected for by evolutionary forces.

What about their role in providing nutrients for pectoral muscles and the deposition of building materials for muscle, skin, and other cells?

While male nipples may play a role in providing nutrients for the pectoral muscles, there is no scientific evidence to suggest that they are involved in the deposition of building materials for muscle, skin, and other cells.

Male nipples are thought to be primarily the result of a developmental process known as ‘recurrent protopathy’ and serve no purpose in the organism.
