It turns out you haven't really had a conversation with Andrew, so he is still technically under the impression that you want him out.

He has been packing his stuff he might be planning to skip rent or rent a storage unit. The situation with Dave has improved, in that it isn't living in the shed, but he is still taking care of him, cleaning his clothes letting him drop in. 

The laundry machine has been still running constantly or sits with a full load whenever he isn't around so it's like I haven't had any opportunity to do my laundry. The freezing weather is nearly over so his personal health is less at risk, but he had a seizure right here in the apartment, and I'm not qualified to run a medical equipment. 

Andrew asked me to call the ambulance but I waited a minute for him to unbuckle his winter coat and overly tight clothing. He has been trying to train him that he won't be able to come here when he isn't here and he hasn't but he is still possibly more likely to come here during an emergency which isn't technically problematic as I can call an ambulance or police.

He has been keeping Norm over the winter although his mental health is deteriorating, and has gangrene on his arm, but will refuse medical attention generally.

I did things like half the dishes a few times again and he just fills up the other half again two times over and then he tells me for three days that he will take care of the mess, because he know I'm always on the brink of just cleaning it all up in a few hours, and he doesn't want to be embarrassed.

He has still been filling the available space and it would still probably be better for my health and productivity if I had a space to work and he didn't clog up the whole environment. I think he has a chaotic and nihilistic worldview and is constantly making messes way faster than he cleans up.

 I had Tyson over a few times but not for any art projects because it is a mess. You could still offer things like to rent him a storage unit, or complain that there has been extra junk all over the yard, but that could make it personal. I still think if you do talk to him, mentioning my mental health would not be a good idea, he might still be planning multiple contingencies, but think he is not being helpful or a good influence on me and I am retreating into virtual worlds although I don't find this very convincing.

Literally if there is a chance he can get all of his stuff out of here it would make me more productive not less, I think he definitely still want to rent a room, but I never worked out any deals with him, he probably knows when he is getting back to from his trip now. I would not try to work out deals with him about continuing to rent the room or a shed for storage unless it's the only possible  solution, if he would get all of his stuff out of here without becoming my enemy or your enemy by creating bad blood it would still be good. I don't think we exactly settled it.