  But that's not how technology develops in reality. The idea that we'd have just one superintelligence doesn't make much sense. We're already seeing a race between different public and private groups to develop smarter machines, so it's likely we'll have a lot of different AIs, with a range of ideas, capabilities and alignments. That means there's likely to be a lot of AIs that spot the paper clip maker gone crazy and say "hey, don't do that" and work to stop it, not to mention people as well. This kind of thinking about superintelligence is a bit how caterpillars might imagine how butterflies think. They've never been a butterfly and they've never met a butterfly so they imagine what it's like to be one and basically they imagine it wrong. Much of the thinking seems to equate superintelligence with homicidal mania. It also tends to see human nature and evolution as favoring brutal, nasty intelligences. In the paper Natural Selection Favors AI Over Humans, the summary says it best: "we argue that natural selection operates on systems that compete and vary, and that selfish species typically have an advantage over species that are altruistic to other species." Huh. You mean like this Gobi fish and shrimp who work together every day? The shrimp dug their home in the ocean and cleans it out. The shrimp has poor eyesight and the Gobi fish has great eyes and it acts as a guard and protects the shrimp. The idea that evolution always favors selfish behavior flies in the face of millions of years of evolution. Ants are tiny by themselves but collectively they build great things. Gorillas gather in groups and stick together to protect them from the wilds, as do many other animals. Humans are the greatest collaborators in the history of the world. We got to where we are through collaboration. Gorillas can't collaborate with more than 50 other gorillas and usually they form tribes of 10. Humans on the other hand can find common ground with 100s of millions or even billions of other people that they have absolutely zero in common with otherwise. How else to explain nation-states and people's patriotic fervor for their country? It's just some lines in the sand that our ancestors made up. None of it is real. And yet it feels very very very real and important to us. We're willing to fight and die and work together with all of our fellow countrymen. Corporations are nothing but hives of people working together. Be honest, how many of your coworkers would you give the time of day to if you didn't work with them? I'm betting even if you're a big extrovert with lots and lots of friends, you wouldn't find common ground with the vast majority of people you work with right now. Most of us have a few friends at work and everyone else is just someone we work with towards a common goal set by someone else. Collaboration at a massive scale is one of the things that makes humans unique. It's like John Nash discovered, we don't just do the selfish thing, we do what's best for us and the group. We find balance. We work together.

