alphanumeric Pertaining to a character sct
that includes letters, digits, and, usually,
other special punctuation character marks.
analog computer A device that operates on
data in the form of continuously variable
physical quantities.
analystSce system analyst.
unnotation symbol A symbol used to add
messages or notes to a flowchart.
ANSI (American National Standards Insti-
tute) An organization that develops and
approves standards in many fields
APL (A Programming Language) A mathe-
matically oriented high-level language fre-
quently used in tmesharing
Software designed
application program
for a specific purpose (such as accounts re-
ceivable, billing, or inventory control).
architecture The organization and inter-
connection of cemputer system components.
arithmetic-logic unit The part of a com-
puting system containing the circuitry that
does the adding. subtracting, multiplying.
dividing, and comparing.
artificial intelligence (Al)_ A computer sci-
ence branch that's involved with using com-
puters to solve problems that appear to re-
quire human imagination or intelligence.
ASCII (American National Standard Code
for Information Interchange) A standard
code used to exchange information among
data processing and communications sys-
tems.
assembler programA computer program
that takes nonmachine-language instructions prepared by a programmer and converts
them into a form that may be used by the
computer.
assembly languageA means of communi-
cating with a computer at a low level. This
language lics between high-level languages
(such as BASIC and COBOL) and machine
language (the ls and 0s the computer under-
stands).
automated office A general term that refers
to the merger of computers, office electronic
devices, and telecommunications technology
in an office environment.
auxiliary storage A storage that supple-
ments the primary internal storage of a com-
puter. Often referred to as secondary stor-
age.
back-end processor A computer that
serves as an interface between a larger CPU
and data bases stored on direct-access stor-
age devices.
background processing The automatic
execution of lower-priority (background)
computer programs during periods when the
system resources are not required to process
higher-priority (foreground) programs.
backup Alternate programs or equipment
used in case the original is incapacitated
bank switched memory The use of soft-
ware-controlled switches that allow a central
processor to switch between memory loca-
tions in primary and supplementary memory
banks so that the apparent size of primary
storage is increased.
BASIC (Beginners All-Purpose Symbolic
Instruction Code) A high-level interactive programming language frequently used with
personal computers and in timesharing environments. 
batch processing A technique in which a number of similar items or transactions to be
processed are grouped (batched) and processed in a designated sequence during amachine run. Often referred to as sequential processing

