

One added benef i t of ma k ing the opponent come to you, as the Japa­ 
nese discovered with the Russians, is that it forces hir n to operate in your 
territory. Being on host i le ground will make hir n nervous and often he will 
rush his actions and make mistakes. For negotiat i ons or meet i ngs, it is al­ 
ways wise to lure others into your territory, or the territory of your choice. 
You have your bearings, while th ey see nothing familiar and ar e subtly 
placed on the defensive. 
Manipulat i on is a dangerous game. Once someone suspects he is 
being manipulated, it becomes harder and harder to control hir n . But 
when you ma k e your opponent come to you, you create th e illusion that he 
is controlling the situat i on. He does not feel the strings that pull hir n , just as 
Napoleon imagined that he hir n self was th e master of his daring escape and 
retur n to power. 
Everyt h ing depends on th e sweet n ess of your ba i t. If your tr ap is at­ 
tractive enough, the turbulence of your enemies' emotions and desires will 
blind them to reality. The greedier they become, the more they can be led 
around. 
The great nineteenth-century robber baron Daniel Drew was a master 
at playing the stock market. Wh en he wanted a part i cular stoc k to be 
bought or sold, driving prices up or down, he ra r ely resorted to the direct 
approach. One of his tr icks was to hurry through an exclusive club near 
Wall Street, obviously on his way to the stock exchange, and to pull out his 
customary red bandanna to wipe his perspiring brow. A slip of paper 
would fall fr om this banda n na that he would pretend not to notice. The 
club's members were always tr ying to foresee Drew's moves, and they 
would pounce on the paper, which invariably seemed to contain an inside 
ti p on a stock. Word would spread, and members would buy or seIl the 
stock in droves, playing perfect l y into Drew's ha n ds. 
If you can get other people to dig their own graves, why sweat your­ 
self? Pickpockets work this to perfection. The key to picking a pocket is 
knowing which pocket contains the wallet. Experienced pickpockets of t en 
ply their trade in train stat i ons and other places where there is a clearly 
marked sign reading BEWARE OF PICKPOCKETS. Passersby seeing the sign in­ 
va r iably feel for their wallet to make sure it is still there. For the watching 
pickpockets, this is like shoot i ng fi sh in a barrel. Pickpockets have even 
been known to place their own BEWARE OF PICKPOCKETS signs to ensure 
their success. 
Wh en you ar e ma k ing people come to you, it is sometimes better to let 
them know you are forcing th eir hand. You give up deception for overt ma­ 
nipulat i on. The psychological ramif i cations are profound: The person who 
makes others come to hir n appears power d, and demands respect.

https://youtu.be/I4UdN-KLyRU