
The Yelling

Over the past three years, we’ve been pounded on the head, gaslit and shamed ad nauseam for being skeptical of the science shoved down our throats by Pfizer, Blackrock, DARPA, and their various friends. We’ve been told again and again that unless we obediently lock our brains in the closet and bend over in response to the television talking heads, we are “anti-science.” What a logical fallacy, what an obvious psychological trick!

For giggles, here is a cheaply made Pfizer commercial from three years ago, glorifying their “science.”

I surmise, the poor pharmaceutical giant must have been struggling with advertising budgets after paying all their fines for fraud and before the rollout of their COVID injections, either that, or the actors were all on lockdown — but as far as I remember, at the time, in New York at least, every corner was buzzing with construction, and 5G antennas were going up like mushroom after a rain — so perhaps, they were just stingy. Anyway, please meet their science:

Science is of course an exciting and tremendously useful field — but when the experts wag their shaming fingers at us and demand that we mindlessly follow whatever they say, they don’t practice science! They engage in blatant social engineering, propaganda, and gaslighting. It is zombie obedience — not curiosity — that they hope to provoke in us. It’s like public school at its worst — but for adults whom they want to control. And they know it. They know it. And they do it anyway.

On my end, I don’t care if the bullies are on Blackrock’s payroll directly or if they engage in their missionary activities pro bono — either way, they are bullies, and I am going to continue to do my own research and trust my own brain and nose over the confusing word salad that comes out of their arrogant mouths.

One more thing. As eloquently noted by Justin Hart in 2022, “it is indeed dangerous to claim to represent science. Science doesn’t need sales reps, since it is the conceptualization of physical reality itself as determined by experiment and data. What Fauci truly represented is the authoritarian State with a capital ‘S’.” Indeed.

What Is Science?

The “old normal” definition of science is not one bit fancy. It’s a method of figuring out how things work by observing, forming hypotheses, testing them out, and adjusting conclusions based on the results. That is it.

People have been practicing science since time immemorial — we are curious beings, we are wired to play with things and to practice science. In fact, our ancestors in the olden days knew a ton about the world: medicine, agriculture, astronomy, etc. They knew a lot more than what today’s priests of institutional science give them credit for.

During those days, survival was tougher, and poor “science” typically meant a shorter life. If our ancestors from thousands of years ago engaged in Neil Ferguson-like “modeling” or Fauci-like “science” — it’s not clear if we as a species would have made it to this day.

Oh, the memories of 2020 and Neil Ferguson, the lockdown-promoting professor at Imperial College London who was caught violating the social distancing rules with a mistress in the middle of a lockdown ...

Bullies’ Monopoly on Correctness

As a society, we are in a messy place. There is a coordinated, well-funded campaign to bring the dignity down. Honest knowledge is censored, and lies get rewarded with bully perks. What is thrown at us as “science” is a counterfeit. It’s an effigy made from scraps of BlackRock talking points, all designed to decimate the people and elevate the thieves. And yet they talk about it as if it were actual science!

In America, all this mad censorship feels bizarre to me. It’s as if I were back in the USSR. As they lie, they also try to enforce a monopoly on correctness and to play an old authoritarian trick. They are tossing big words up and down, changing definitions as they please, and repeating lies until they stick.

What I see is a swapping of psychological frameworks. The expensive-looking, colorful version of the “western” marketing brochure is being urgently recalled — and a new brochure, printed on dirty paper in gray tones, is getting shipped in. Yikes.

Good ol’ Corruption

In addition to the planned obsoletion of dignity, good ol’ corruption reigns supreme. Two years ago, I wrote this story about corruption in the medical establishment. Since then, it only got worse. A couple of telling quotes:

“It is simply no longer possible to believe much of the clinical research that is published, or to rely on the judgment of trusted physicians or authoritative medical guidelines. I take no pleasure in this conclusion, which I reached slowly and reluctantly over my two decades as an editor of The New England Journal of Medicine,” wrote Marcia Angell in 2009.

￼

“Much of the scientific literature, perhaps half, may simply be untrue. Afflicted by studies with small sample sizes, tiny effects, invalid exploratory analyses, and flagrant conflicts of interest, together with an obsession for pursuing fashionable trends of dubious importance, science has taken a turn towards darkness,” wrote Richard Horton, the Editor-in-Chief of the Lancet in 2015.

Speaking of Richard Horton and the Lancet, remember the outlandishly fraudulent HCQ-bashing study that they published in 2020 and then had to retract?

According to the New York Times, “Dr. Horton called the paper retracted by his journal a ‘fabrication’ and ‘a monumental fraud.’ But peer review was never intended to detect outright deceit, he said, and anyone who thinks otherwise has ‘a fundamental misunderstanding of what peer review is ... If you have an author who deliberately tries to mislead, it’s surprisingly easy for them to do so,’ he said.” Now we know.

Real Science Is Never Final

If “consensus” were a meaningful measure of any truth, no scientific discoveries would ever be made since at all times, there is a “consensus” (real or fabricated) on how things work.

Funny, growing up, I believed that there were many potential discoveries in the ocean and in space — but that the human anatomy had been exhaustively studied. Well, that, too, was wrong! To this day, researchers keep discovering new parts of human anatomy and new ways those parts interact. Case in point.

A New Part of the Brain

Earlier this year, they discovered a new part of the brain. Previously, the accepted view was that the membrane surrounding the brain consisted of three layers. In January 2023, a fourth layer was announced. It was called SLYM (Subarachnoid LYmphatic-like Membrane). According to Science magazine:

“The central nervous system is lined by meninges, classically known as dura, arachnoid, and pia mater. We show the existence of a fourth meningeal layer that compartmentalizes the subarachnoid space in the mouse and human brain, designated the subarachnoid lymphatic-like membrane (SLYM).

SLYM is morpho- and immunophenotypically similar to the mesothelial membrane lining of peripheral organs and body cavities, and it encases blood vessels and harbors immune cells.

Functionally, the close apposition of SLYM with the endothelial lining of the meningeal venous sinus permits direct exchange of small solutes between cerebrospinal fluid and venous blood, thus representing the mouse equivalent of the arachnoid granulations. The functional characterization of SLYM provides fundamental insights into brain immune barriers and fluid transport

