The universe & its’ contents are constructed from a basic pattern modified for form & function. The key ingredient for the patterns are space, time, energy since the universe runs on the number (3) which is yes (1), no (0) & maybe (faction).

Maybe (fraction) is the basis of evolution in that it may work or not in form & function in order to resolve a perceived problem. The downside is patterns involve relationships & relationships for all species, however defined, is extremely difficult because relationships appear & ebb & flow from the future as well as the present.

Fortunately, the universe is just as lazy as us, so it modifies its’ patterns the least way possible to get the problem solved. Energy in our space world flows. This flow is called entropy.

Energy flows out of physical structures, animate like all living etc. & inanimate structures like buildings. Hence everything is always in a state of needing repair either now or in the future.

The universe’s yes (1) & no (0) is also a fancy way of saying mathematically that the universe runs on counterbalances. Gravity is a counterbalance to entropy which brings up energy. Energy in the quantum world is measured in electron volts.

Electron volts mathematically speaking usually has time in its’ equations whereas in our space world mathematical equations has space jazzed up or hidden in various forms that aren’t easily recognizable in concept or form like a’s & b’s in mathematical equations that are usually involving limits to space to find differences (subtraction) or limits (ends) as in the right answer in one figure or number.

Calculus is motion mathematics which is always approaching the limit or finding something using maybe (fraction) to see how close you can get to a limit.

 Einstein used geometry to explain the curvature of space with the side effect of slowing down time.

If electron volts using time in its’ equations is in the quantum world then it stands to reason that time has a property of gravity. The downside is we can’t see time except as in a clock (t) & time doesn’t react with anything so we naturally say it doesn’t exist since we can’t touch or feel it.

If space is a field then time is a field.

If we can have planets etc. which philosophically is rolled space then we have rolled time since the universe is lazy like us & tends to solve problems using patterns that are modified in form & function but basically the same. 

Rolled time is probably a graviton that doesn’t react with anything so we’re clueless. Rolled time or a graviton pulls on galaxies that we see as extra mass since we can’t see it as gravity because we first see things visually, then by sound & last by thinking.

Rolled time isn’t visual & it doesn’t make a sound & we can’t find it doing any thinking or processing as rolled time.

Paradoxically, time uses gravity to slow down space similar to Einstein using space to slow down time so everything in the universe is coordinated in similar patterns modified for new forms & functions. 

https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/article/what-are-gravitons/