I went to Cuba twice for five weeks each time, around 2003 and 2017. I am Canadian so the embargo doesn't exactly apply. I did see military personnel with machine guns come to my hostel, and was even asked by military police to take my foot off a cement bench in the park.

My Cuban friend tried to warn me and I said only an idiot would do that. It is not a fancy couch in your grandmother's house, we are outdoors and this is how I prefer to sit.

Anyways, it seems kind of ridiculous that I would risk my life to be able to sit in a squatted position, but every day thousands of things like this happened.

There was burning of rats with diesel gas in the streets, electrical wires ran uninsulated down the sides of houses, which after a rainstorm would electrify the main steel gates with 220 volts. Kids swung rocks on strings to try to grab the powerlines. 

No one seemed capable of planning more than two steps into the future and everyone spends most of their time lining up in queues at venders to get carrots, tomatoes, and lettuce, each separately. No one has come up with the idea of cooperatives or else they are banned. The meat was not refrigerated and every customer picked it up or pinched it to check its texture.

The bed I slept in was so infused with black mold that I wrapped it in duct tape and garbage bags, but it was still uncomfortable with all the steel bits sticking out.

One feverish night I thought if I could leave a travel review I would say, don't ever visit this country, and I realized that the whole point of the embargo was to cripple the economy and it only didn't work because Canada and other countries refused to join it.

In my opinion, this is probably a crime against humanity, because the people in Cuba are being enstupified by their ridiculous education system and extremely limited media and internet access.

The only other solution I can think of is building a bridge to Florida and to the Yucatan. If you stay on a resort you don't see the real Cuba at all, because real Cubans aren't allowed in the hotels unless they are cleared for it and Cubans are forbidden from eating beef, since it can get a higher price from tourists.

I was continually shocked by the poverty, I had to bring my own spoon to work so that I could eat. People were living on like 30 dollars a month.

Anyways, I have tried to refrain from being too critical of the government because I don't want to be put on some list that forbids me from visiting again.

Maybe in another five or ten years I'll forget how traumatic and horrifying the things I saw were and feel like going back. I am pretty sure I will not want to stay in a hotel because I still would prefer to experience things as the Cubans do, although that is of course impossible since I am used to things like running water and electricity and internet access.

It seemed to me that the people did not trust each other and they were all trying to scam each other at every transaction. It is the customer's responsibility to demand to see the price before and to demand a receipt and such signs were posted in shops.

The oppression leads to paranoia, with the residents all thinking the government is spying on them and recording all their phone calls, despite the technological infeasibility of this.