ÎÎ¿á¿¶, á¼„ÏÎ± Îµá¼°Î¼Î¯

ğ˜šğ˜¦ğ˜¦ ğ˜ªğ˜§ ğ˜ºğ˜°ğ˜¶ ğ˜¤ğ˜¢ğ˜¯ ğ˜ªğ˜®ğ˜±ğ˜³ğ˜°ğ˜·ğ˜¦ ğ˜µğ˜©ğ˜ªğ˜´ ğ˜±ğ˜­ğ˜¢ğ˜º ğ˜£ğ˜º ğ˜ªğ˜¯ğ˜¤ğ˜­ğ˜¶ğ˜¥ğ˜ªğ˜¯ğ˜¨ ğ˜µğ˜©ğ˜¦ğ˜®ğ˜¦ğ˜´ ğ˜§ğ˜³ğ˜°ğ˜® ğ˜µğ˜©ğ˜ªğ˜´ ğ˜¦ğ˜¯ğ˜µğ˜ªğ˜³ğ˜¦ ğ˜¤ğ˜°ğ˜¯ğ˜·ğ˜¦ğ˜³ğ˜´ğ˜¢ğ˜µğ˜ªğ˜°ğ˜¯ ğ˜¨ğ˜°ğ˜ªğ˜¯ğ˜¨ ğ˜£ğ˜¢ğ˜¤ğ˜¬ ğ˜µğ˜° ğ˜µğ˜©ğ˜¦ ğ˜´ğ˜µğ˜¢ğ˜³ğ˜µ.

Title: "The Mouse Who Knew Right From Wrong: A Play About Theseus"

Setting: A cheese factory where Theseus the mouse lives.

Scene 1:

(Theseus enters, holding a piece of cheese in his hand. He is deep in thought and seems uneasy.)

Theseus: (to himself) I have this strange feeling that I shouldn't be taking this cheese. But why shouldn't I? It's just a small piece, and no one will notice. (pauses) Wait, is this what they call conscience?

(Enter Conscience, an angelic figure)

Conscience: Yes, Theseus, it is your conscience speaking to you.

Theseus: But I can't put it into words why I shouldn't take the cheese.

Conscience: That doesn't matter. The fact that you have a feeling that it's wrong is enough. You should listen to your conscience and avoid doing the action.

Theseus: (thinking) You're right, Conscience. I shouldn't do what feels wrong, even if I can't explain why.

Scene 2:

(Theseus is in the cheese factory, surrounded by cheese. He hears a noise and turns around to see the Cat sneaking up on him.)

Cat: (sneaking up on Theseus) Hey there, little mouse. How about you hand over that cheese you have there?

Theseus: (determined) I can't do that. My conscience is telling me it's wrong.

Cat: (laughing) Conscience? What's that? You mice are so funny with your silly moral codes.

Theseus: (stands up to the Cat) It may be silly to you, but it's what makes me who I am. And I won't do anything that goes against my conscience, no matter what.

(Enter the other mice, who have been listening)

Other Mice: That's right, Theseus! We should all listen to our conscience and do what's right, even if it's hard.

Scene 3:

(Theseus and the other mice are together, discussing what they have learned)

Theseus: (addressing the other mice) I've learned that our conscience is like a deep inner voice that guides us towards what's right. And even though it might not always be easy to understand, we should listen to it and trust that it will lead us in the right direction.

Other Mice: (nodding in agreement) That's exactly right, Theseus. Our conscience is like a compass that helps us navigate the maze of life.

Theseus: (smiling) And just like in a maze, we may not always know where we're going, but as long as we listen to our conscience, we'll always find our way home.

(All the mice nod in agreement as the scene comes to an end)

End Scene.


Scene 4:

(Enter Jacques Ellul, an old philosopher mouse)

Jacques Ellul: Excuse me, excuse me. I couldn't help but overhear your conversation.

Theseus: (surprised) Oh, hello there! What brings you here?

Jacques Ellul: I've been observing the cheese factory and the mice who live here for some time now. I'm a philosopher, you see. And I've come to bring some insight into this conversation about conscience.

Theseus: (interested) Please, do tell!

Jacques Ellul: You see, your conscience is a product of your environment, your experiences, and the social and cultural forces that surround you. While it's a personal, individual experience, it's also a product of a larger, pre-existing sociological reality.

Other Mice: (looking confused) Can you explain that in simpler terms?

Jacques Ellul: Of course. Think of it like this: your conscience is shaped by the world around you, but it also shapes the decisions you make.

So, when you listen to your conscience, you're not just following your own individual judgment, but you're also conforming to a larger societal norm.

Theseus: (thinking) That's interesting. So, our conscience is both personal and societal at the same time.

Jacques Ellul: Exactly. And it's important to understand this relationship between your individual decisions and the larger sociological reality, because it has implications for the kind of society we live in and the kind of lives we lead.

Other Mice: (nodding in agreement) We need to be aware of the influences that shape our conscience and make sure we're making decisions that align with our own values and beliefs, not just what society tells us is right.

Jacques Ellul: Precisely. It's a delicate balance, but it's worth striving for.

Theseus: (smiling) Thank you for your insights, Jacques. This has been a valuable lesson for all of us.

Jacques Ellul: My pleasure, my friends. I'm glad I could contribute to your growth and understanding.

(All the mice nod in agreement as the play comes to an end)

End Scene.



