Giulio Tononi, Olaf Sporns, and Gerald M. Edelman
Measures of degeneracy and redundancy in biological networks
PNAS 96: 3257-3262, 1999.
"Degeneracy, the ability of elements that are structurally different to perform the same function, is a prominent property of many biological systems ranging from genes to neural networks to evolution itself. Because structurally different elements may produce different outputs in different contexts, degeneracy should be distinguished from redundancy, which occurs when the same function is performed by identical elements. However, because of ambiguities in the distinction between structure and function and because of the lack of a theoretical treatment, these two notions often are conflated. By using information theoretical concepts, we develop here functional measures of the degeneracy and redundancy of a system with respect to a set of outputs. These measures help to distinguish the concept of degeneracy from that of redundancy and make it operationally useful. Through computer simulations of neural systems differing in connectivity, we show that degeneracy is low both for systems in which each element affects the output independently and for redundant systems in which many elements can affect the output in a similar way but do not have independent effects. By contrast, degeneracy is high for systems in which many different elements can affect the output in a similar way and at the same time can have independent effects. We demonstrate that networks that have been selected for degeneracy have high values of complexity, a measure of the average mutual information between the subsets of a system. These measures promise to be useful in characterizing and understanding the functional robustness and adaptability of biological networks." [Full Text]

Emmons RA.
Abstract versus concrete goals: personal striving level, physical illness, and psychological well-being.
J Pers Soc Psychol 1992 Feb;62(2):292-300
"This study examined the relation between personal striving level and psychological and physical well-being. Level refers to the degree of generality versus specificity of one's goal strivings. In 3 studies, 188 Ss generated lists of their personal strivings, which were then rated on specificity level. High-level striving was associated with more psychological distress, particularly depression. Low-level striving was related to higher levels of physical illness. Correlations between striving level and self-reported symptoms were generally not as strong as those between level and the more objective illness indicators. High-level strivings were seen as more difficult and requiring more effort than low-level strivings. Results are interpreted in terms of control theory, goal-setting theory, and the repressive personality style." [Abstract]

Vancouver JB, Thompson CM, Tischner EC, Putka DJ.
Two studies examining the negative effect of self-efficacy on performance.
J Appl Psychol 2002 Jun;87(3):506-16
"Although hundreds of studies have found a positive relationship between self-efficacy and performance, several studies have found a negative relationship when the analysis is done across time (repeated measures) rather than across individuals. W. T. Powers (1991) predicted this negative relationship based on perceptual control theory. Here, 2 studies are presented to (a) confirm the causal role of self-efficacy and (b) substantiate the explanation. In Study 1, self-efficacy was manipulated for 43 of 87 undergraduates on an analytic game. The manipulation was negatively related to performance on the next trial. In Study 2, 104 undergraduates played the analytic game and reported self-efficacy between each game and confidence in the degree to which they had assessed previous feedback. As expected, self-efficacy led to overconfidence and hence increased the likelihood of committing logic errors during the game." [Abstract]

Kim Y.
The role of cognitive control in mediating the effect of stressful circumstances among Korean immigrants.
Health Soc Work 2002 Feb;27(1):36-46
"The study reported in this article investigated relationships among stressful circumstances, cognitive control (the individual's perception of control over life), and distress among Korean immigrants in the United States. Specifically, it was hypothesized that cognitive control mediated the effect of exposure to stressful circumstances on distress. A total of 159 Korean immigrants participated in the study. The result of the study provided strong support for the role of cognitive control in mediating the relationship between stressful circumstances and distress. The detrimental effect of exposure to stressful circumstances on distress was weakened by cognitive control." [Abstract]

Coping with unplanned childhood hospitalization: the mediating functions of parental beliefs.
J Pediatr Psychol 1995 Jun;20(3):299-312
"Examined the processes by which two types of informational interventions (child behavioral information and parental role information) exerted effects on the coping outcomes of 108 mothers whose young children experienced unplanned hospitalization. Driven by a strong theoretical framework comprising self-regulation theory and control theory, this study's findings revealed that the effects of the experimental interventions were mediated by parental beliefs about their children's likely behavioral changes and their parental role during hospitalization. Thus, progress was made in beginning to understand how informational interventions actually enhance parent coping with childhood hospitalization." [Abstract]
Kobak RR, Cole HE, Ferenz-Gillies R, Fleming WS, Gamble W.
Attachment and emotion regulation during mother-teen problem solving: a control theory analysis.
Child Dev 1993 Feb;64(1):231-45
"We present a control theory analysis of adolescents' attachment strategies in the Adult Attachment Interview (AAI). In Study 1, Q-sort prototypes for secure/anxious and deactivating/hyperactivating strategies were used to differentiate between Main and Goldwyn's AAI classifications. In Study 2, we examined how AAI strategies were associated with emotion regulation during mother-teen problem solving. 4 aspects of mother-teen problem solving (dysfunctional anger, support/validation, avoidance of problem solving, and maternal dominance) were used to predict teens' AAI strategies. Teens with secure strategies engaged in problem-solving discussions characterized by less dysfunctional anger and less avoidance of problem solving. In addition, attachment security showed a curvilinear relation with maternal dominance, indicating that secure teens maintained balanced assertiveness with their mothers. Teens with deactivating strategies engaged in problem-solving interactions characterized by higher levels of maternal dominance and dysfunctional anger. The contribution of attachment strategies to teens' autonomy and to transformations in mother-teen relationships is discussed." [Abstract]

Posner MI, Rothbart MK.
Attention, self-regulation and consciousness.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1998 Nov 29;353(1377):1915-27.
"Consciousness has many aspects. These include awareness of the world, feelings of control over one's behaviour and mental state (volition), and the notion of continuing self. Focal (executive) attention is used to control details of our awareness and is thus closely related to volition. Experiments suggest an integrated network of neural areas involved in executive attention. This network is associated with our voluntary ability to select among competing items, to correct error and to regulate our emotions. Recent neuroimaging studies suggest that these various functions involve separate areas of the anterior cingulate. We have adopted a strategy of using marker tasks, shown to activate the brain area by imaging studies, as a means of tracing the development of attentional networks. Executive attention appears to develop first to regulate distress during the first year of life. During later childhood the ability to regulate conflict among competing stimuli builds upon the earlier cingulate anatomy to provide a means of cognitive control. During childhood the activation of cingulate structures relates both to the child's success on laboratory tasks involving conflict and to parental reports of self-regulation and emotional control. These studies indicate a start in understanding the anatomy, circuitry and development of executive attention networks that serve to regulate both cognition and emotion." [Abstract]

Aarts H, Dijksterhuis A, De Vries P.
On the psychology of drinking: being thirsty and perceptually ready.
Br J Psychol 2001 Nov;92(Pt 4):631-42
"The present research is concerned with cognitive effects of habitually regulated primary motives. Specifically, two experiments tested the idea that feelings of thirst enhance the cognitive accessibility of, or readiness to perceive, action-relevant stimuli. In a task allegedly designed to assess mouth-detection skills, some participants were made to feel thirsty, whereas others were not. Results showed that participants who were made thirsty responded faster to drinking-related items in a lexical decision task, and performed better on an incidental recall task of drinking-related items, relative to no-thirst control participants. These results suggest that basic needs and motives, such as thirst, causes a heightened perceptual readiness to environmental cues that are instrumental in satisfying these needs." [Abstract]

Toppino TC.
Reversible-figure perception: mechanisms of intentional control.
Percept Psychophys. 2003 Nov;65(8):1285-95.
"Observers can exert a degree of intentional control over the perception of reversible figures. Also, the portion of the stimulus that is selected for primary or enhanced processing (focal-feature processing) influences how observers perceive a reversible figure. Two experiments investigated whether voluntary control over perception of a Necker cube could be explained in terms of intentionally selecting appropriate focal features within the stimulus for primary processing. In Experiment 1, varying observers' intentions and the focus of primary processing produced additive effects on the percentage of time that one alternative was perceived. In Experiment 2, the effect of varying the focus of primary processing was eliminated by the use of a small cube, but the effect of intention was unaltered. The results indicate that intentional control over perception can be exerted independently of focal-feature processing, perhaps by top-down activation or priming of perceptual represe