at:https://github.com/LiyuanLucasLiu/ 
ReHession. 
Kind Wiki-KBPNYT 
#Types#LF#Types#LF 
Pattern1314716115 
KB772526 
Table 4:Number of labeling functions and the relation 
types they can annotated w.r.t. two kinds of information 
CoreNLP tool (Manning et al., 2014) to generate 
entitymentions andgetPOStagsforbothdatasets. 
Brown clusters(Brown et al., 1992) are derived for 
each corpus using public implementation2.All 
these features are shared with all compared meth- 
ods in our experiments. 
Labeling Functions.In our experiments, label- 
ing functions are employed to encode two kinds of 
supervision information. One is knowledge base, 
the other is handcrafted domain-specif i c patterns. 
For domain-specif i c patterns, we manually design 
a number of labeling functions3; for knowledge 
base, annotations are generated following the pro- 
cedure in (Ren et al., 2016; Riedel et al., 2010). 
Regarding two kinds of supervision informa- 
tion, the statistics of the labeling functions are 
summarized in Table 4.We can observe that 
heuristic patterns can identify more relation types 
for KBP datasets, while for NYT datasets, knowl- 
edge base can provide supervision for more rela- 
tion types. This observation aligns with our intu- 
ition that single kind of information might be in- 
suff i cient while different kinds of information can 
complement each other. 
We further summarize the statistics of annota- 
tions in Table 6. It can be observed that a large 
portion of instances is only annotated as None, 
while lots of conf l icts exist among other instances. 
This phenomenon justif i es the motivation to em- 
ploy true label discovery model to resolve the con- 
l icts among supervision. Also, we can observe 
most conf l icts involve None type, accordingly, 
our proposed method should have more advan- 
tages over traditional true label discovery methods 
on the relation extraction task comparing to the re- 
lation classif i cation task that excludes None type. 
4.2Compared Methods 
We compare REHESSIONwith below methods: 
FIGER(Ling and Weld, 2012) adopts multi-label 
2https://github.com/percyliang/ 
brown-cluster 
3pattern-based labelingfunctionscanbeaccessed 
at:https://github.com/LiyuanLucasLiu/ 
ReHession 
51