Hello. I've read about half your book on understanding quantum mechanics.

It seems I'm using this gpt to help me dialogue and criticize and find connections.

From my perspective it doesn't seem like I know any math but I always got good marks, and can do a lot of programming, trigonometry, and geometry in my head.

I "accidentally" also find myself dealing with a lot of controversial issues, ask some taboo questions.

Anyways, maybe it isn't interesting to you but I would appreciate any input.

I don't think I can share many of my ideas widely, they alienate me from others.

The people I know are not thinking about these things, and I think if my ideas where widely shared, they could put me in danger.

Not to scare you, I think I am trying to explore the nature of truth, but I don't understand how you guys (journalists and physicists) can proclaim stuff like that so flippantly and safely.

I spent like a year or more volunteering in Cuba and Mexico over a number of trips and I think seeing such poverty has made me take a vow of poverty or something, or maybe I have severe asperger's or something.

I could never convey some of my basic knowledge of statistics or probability to my parents, and my younger brother is being abusive and threatening to them so much so that I had to block him.

I am happy to live in a world separated from all of that I just will avoid working with people if I have to although the number of people I have gotten along with is like thousands and the people who have tried to call me an enemy are like 3 or 4 or five.

Nevertheless I don't feel like stopping and am worried that I will publish art and essays that are too controversial and put me in danger.

I don't know if I live among rednecks or what is the issue but it is also possible that people are just extremely frightened of what they don't understand.

That comment about scary unabomber writing really hit home, I get that from anyone who looks at my notes even if it's just about basic math or the Greek alphabet.

Anyways, try to ignore my seemingly negative tone, I personally consider myself to be an optimist, but this includes constantly thinking of ways complex systems can go wrong, and I think that there is a lot. 

So it's difficult to explain how I think asteroids are a real danger, even if they are very tiny by the time they get to the earth's surface if they could hit you in the head.

I see people's careers canceled and destroyed for saying things that seem take, and I know people will even kill people based on lies and made up beliefs.

If I don't engage the public, I don't get so many lies about me. 

Nevertheless I feel guilty sometimes I think I have discovered real knowledge that might help people, but without money, security, or any kind of backing from any institution or job, I have no platform to speak and no one to protect me, if I accidentally (or purposely) offend someone. I think I want to help people deal with their worst fears through art, music, and literature. It doesn't look to me like a lot of people are interested in facing their fears, it looks like they will just cancel you and deplatform you. Although I am Canadian Trump's 2016 started to kill my courage to share my thoughts publically, because I was shocked that any news agency would cover him and doubly shocked that anyone would vote for him.

Two years of semi isolation hasn't been good, people were suspicious enough of me when I was surrounded by people constantly they still thought of me as a loner of some kind merely because I am also comfortable being alone.


Here Be Dragons

A Saga Begins
https://github.com/standardgalactic/example/tree/main/gpt-cheatsheet

Private Thoughts
https://github.com/standardgalactic/xanadu