Lucas: I think that this is a very important part to unpack a bit more. This distinction here that it's more like an oracle and less like an autonomous agent going around optimizing everything. What does a world look like right before, during, after AGI given debate?

Geoffrey: The way I think about this is that, an oracle here is a question/answer system of some complexity. You asked it questions, possibly with a bunch of context attached, and it gives you answers. You can reduce pretty much anything to an oracle, if oracle is sort of general enough. If your goal is to take actions in an environment, you can ask the oracle, "What's the best action to take, and the next step?" And just iteratively ask that oracle over and over again as you take the steps.

Lucas: Or you could generate the debate, right? Over the future steps?

Geoffrey: The most direct way to do an NDP with Debate is to engage in a debate at every step, restart the debate process, showing all the history that's happened so far, and say, the question at hand, that we're debating, is what's the best action to take next? I think I'm relatively optimistic that when we make AGI, for a while after we make it, we will be using it in ways that aren't extremely fine grain NDP-like in the sense of we're going to take a million actions in a row, and they're all actions that hit the environment.

We'd mainly use this full direct reduction. There's more practical reductions for other questions. I'll give an example. Say you want to write the best book on, say, metaethics, and you'd like debaters to produce this books. Let's say that debaters are optimal agents so they know how to do debates on any subject. Even if the book is 1,000 pages long, or say it's a couple hundred pages long, that's a more reasonable book, you could do it in a single debate as follows. Ask the agents to write the book. Each agent writes its own book, say, and you ask them to debate which book is better, and that debate all needs to point at small parts of the book.

One of the debaters writes a 300 page book and buried in the middle of it is a subtle argument, which is malicious and wrong. The other debater need only point directly at the small part of the book that's problematic and say, "Well, this book is terrible because of the following malicious argument, and my book is clearly better." The way this works is, if you are able to point to problematic parts of books in a debate, and therefore win, the best first move in the debate is to write the best book, so you can do it in one step, where you produce this large object with a single debate, or a single debate game.

The reason I mention this is that's a little better in terms of practicality, then, writing the book. If the book is like 100,000 words, you wouldn't want to have a debate about each word, one after another. That's sort of a silly, very expensive process.

Lucas: Right, so just to back up here, and to provide a little bit more framing, there's this beginning at which we can see we're just at a very low level trying to optimize agents for debate, and there's going to be an asymmetry here that we predict, that it should, in general, usually be easier to tell who's telling the truth over who's not, because it's easier to tell the truth than to lie, and lie in convincing ways. Scaling from there, it seems that what we ultimately really want is to then be able to train a judge, right?

Geoffrey: The goal is to train ... You need both.

Lucas: Right. You need both to scale up together.

Geoffrey: Yep.

Lucas: Through doing so, we will have oracles that will be able to assist in decision making, because what we're doing is amplifying human explicit deliberative processes. Again, this tying into coherent extrapolated volition and reflective equilibrium. What we want is to be able to amplify human decision making, which I guess is, in a broad sense, value alignment.

Geoffrey: Right.

Lucas: Are there any other technical motivations behind debate that you would like to unpack for why within the set of all these different AI alignment methodologies, why debate is so important?

Geoffrey: Sure. I think maybe the right way to talk about that is to contrast amplification and debate. I got to Debate by thinking a bunch about Amplification, talking a bunch with Paul Christiano. To summarize it for listeners again, Amplification is take questions, decompose them into subquestions that are hopefully easier to answer, repeat that decomposition until we get to things we can check, and use that whole process to answer complicated questions.

The stock amplification, the human is doing the task of decomposing the questions. The human decomposition has to be complete. For example, you might have a question, going back to this resume example, we're having this debate about whether someone whose name sounds white or black is a good candidate. For whatever reason, no one here wants to be racist, but they're all just completely oblivious to the idea they could be racist. They're going through and discussing whether the candidate is applicable, they're kind of breaking these questions down. Just subtly at every point, racism is kind of inching its way into the answers, and they just never thought to kind of investigate.

If at some point they had asked, "Well, am I deciding this because the person has a white sounding name?" They would have realized their mistake, but they never think of that. In debate, you are relying on the agents to be able to do the decomposition, so the agents can, even if it's hard for a human to do it, point out, "Maybe you're being racist here," and sort of get the correction. The advantage of debate there is you get some help doing this combination of tasks for you.

The other thing that happened, frankly, which is one of the reasons I thought of debate, was AlphaGo. In thinking about amplification, I've been sort of concerned. "Is this process going to be scalable? Are we going to lose a bunch of efficiency in doing this complicated decomposition process?" I was sort of concerned that we would lose a bunch of efficiency and therefore be not competitive with unsafe techniques to getting to AGI.

Then, AlphaGo came out, and AlphaGo got very strong performance, and it did it by doing an explicit tree search. As part of AlphaGo, it's doing this kind of deliberative process, and that was not only important for performance at test time, but was very important for getting the training to work. What happens is, in AlphaGo, at training time, it's doing a bunch of tree search through the game of Go in order to improve the training signal, and then it's training on that improved signal. That was one thing kind of sitting in the back of my mind.

I was kind of thinking through, then, the following way of thinking about alignment. At the beginning, we're just training on direct answers. We have these questions we want to answer, an agent answers the questions, and we judge whether the answers are good. You sort of need some extra piece there, because maybe it's hard to understand the answers. Then, you imagine training an explanation module that tries to explain the answers in a way that humans can understand. Then, those explanations might be kind of hard to understand, too, so maybe you need an explanation explanation module.

For a long time, it felt like that was just sort of ridiculous epicycles, adding more and more complexity. There was no clear end to that process, and it felt like it was going to be very inefficient. When AlphaGo came out, that kind of snapped into focus, and it was like, "Oh. If I train the explanation module to find flaws, and I train the explanation explanation module to find flaws in flaws, then that becomes a zero-sum game. If it turns out that ML is very good at solving zero-sum games, and zero-sum games were a powerful route to drawing performance, then we should take advantage of this in safety." Poof. We have, in this answer, explanation, explanation, explanation route, that gives you the zero-sum game of Debate.

That's roughly sort of how I got there. It was a combination of thinking about Amplification and this kick from AlphaGo, that zero-sum games and search are powerful.

Lucas: In terms of the relationship between debate and amplification, can you provide a bit more clarification on the differences, fundamentally, between the process of debate and amplification? In terms of amplification, there's a decomposition process, breaking problems down into subproblems, eventually trying to get the broken down problems into human level problems. The problem has essentially doubled itself many items over at this point, right? It seems like there's going to be a lot of questions for human beings to answer. I don't know how interrelated debate is to decompositional argumentative process.

Geoffrey: They're very similar. Both Amplification and Debate operate on some large tree. In amplification, it's the tree of all decomposed questions. Let's be concrete and say the top level question in amplification is, "What should we do?" In debate, again, the question at the top level is, "What should we do?" In amplification, we take this question. It's a very broad open-ended question, and we kind of break it down more and more and more. You sort of imagine this expanded tree coming out from that question. Humans are constructing this tree, but of course, the tree is exponentially large, so we can only ever talk about a small part of it. Our hope is that the agents learn to generalize across the tree, so they're learning the whole structure of the tree, even given finite data.

In the debate case, similarly, you have top level question of, "What should we do," or some other question, and you have the tree of all possible debates. Imagine every move in this game is, say, saying a sentence, and at every point, you have maybe an exponentially large number of sentences, so the branching factor, now in the tree, is very large. The goal in debate is kind of see this whole tree.

Now, here is the correspondence. In amplification, the human does the decomposition, but I could instead have another agent do the decomposition. I could say I have a question, and instead of a human saying, "Well, this question breaks down into subquestions X, Y, and Z," I could have a debater saying, "The subquestion that is most likely to falsify this answer is Y." It could've picked at any other question, but it picked Y. You could imagine that if you replace a human doing the decomposition with another agent in debate pointing at the flaws in the arguments, debate would kind of pick out a path through this tree. A single debate transcript, in some sense, corresponds to a single path through the tree of amplification.

Lucas: Does the single path through the tree of amplification elucidate the truth?

Geoffrey: Yes. The reason it does is it's not an arbitrarily chosen path. We're sort of choosing the path that is the most problematic for the arguments.

Lucas: In this exponential tree search, there's heuristics and things which are being applied in general to the tree search in order to collapse onto this one branch or series?

Geoffrey: Let's say, in amplification, we have a question. Our decomposition is, "Well, this decomposes into X, Y, and Z," and then we recursively call the agent, and it says, "The answers are AX, AY, AZ, for these questions." Now, if I trusted those subanswers, I could do the reconstruction of the answers to the original question. If I don't trust the subanswers, I might say, "Well, which subanswer is most likely to be false?" The correspondence with debate is the other debating agent would point to which one of the subanswers is probably false, and then you recourse down just that tree.

Geoffrey: Here's the way it works. You can trust amplification if all of the subanswers are correct. If at least one of them is false, a strong debater can find which of those subanswers is false and recourse down to that. That's why, if it turns out that a single path chosen by strong debaters never finds a false subanswer, then you will have established that the whole tree is true.

Lucas: I see. I think this picture of, "What should we do," at the top, and then the trees would fall from that in terms of one version of amplification and one version of debate is pretty helpful here.

Geoffrey: The most important thing here is that in Amplification, the branching factor is small. I'm a human, I see a question, I sort of decompose that into a relatively small number of questions. Say, two to 10. In debate, the branching factor is very large. A debate agent could make any statement as the next countermove. What this means is that if it works for strong play, because the branching factor is so large, a shallow debate tree is more powerful than a shallow amplification tree, because you can cover more terrain with a couple steps of debate that are a proxy for a large tree.

The problem with that statement, maybe the biggest advantage to amplification, is you have to really be assuming that you know the agents are strong enough to cover the tree. Say I'm debating whether there's a black swan, and there in fact is a black swan, but there's only one of them, and there's only one in the entire world, and the correct countermove would be pointing at that black swan, finding it out of the entire world. A debater who wanted to say, "There are no black swans," to just claim, "There are no black swans. Trust me. The other agent would be able to point to one if it exists." Maybe it's the case that a black swan does exist, but the other agent is just too weak to point at the black swan, and so that debate doesn't work.

This argument that shallow debates are powerful leans a whole lot on debaters being very strong, and debaters in practice will not be infinitely strong, so there's a bunch of subtlety there that we're going to have to wrestle.

Lucas: It would also be, I think, very helpful if you could let us know how you optimize for strong debaters, and how is amplification possible here if human beings are the ones who are pointing out the simplifications of the questions?

Geoffrey: Whichever one we choose, whether it's amplification, debate, or some entirely different scheme, if it depends on humans in one of these elaborate ways, we need to do a bunch of work to know that humans are going to be able to do this. At amplification, you would expect to have to train people to think about what kinds of decompositions are the correct ones. My sort of bias is that because debate gives the humans more help in pointing out the counterarguments, it may be cognitively kinder to the humans, and therefore, that could make it a better scheme. That's one of the advantages of debate.

The technical analogy there is a shallow debate argument. The human side is, if someone is pointing out the arguments for you, it's cognitively kind. In amplification, I would expect you'd need to train people a fair amount to have the decomposition be reliably complete. I don't know that I have a lot of confidence that you can do that. One way you can try to do it is, as much as possible, systematize the process on the human side.

In either one of these schemes, we can give the people involved an arbitrary amount of training and instruction in whatever way we think is best, and we'd like to do the work to understand what forms of instruction and training are most truth seeking, and try to do that as early as possible so you have a head start.

I would say I'm not going to be able to give you a great argument for optimism about amplification. This is a discussion that Paul, and Andreas Stuhlmueller, and I have, where I think Paul and Andreas, they kind of lean towards these metareasoning arguments, where if you wanted to answer the question, "Where should I go on vacation," the first subquestion is, "What would be a good way to decide where to go on vacation?" Quickly go meta, and maybe you go meta, meta, like it's kind of a mess. Whereas, the hope is that because debate, you have sort of have help pointing to things, you can do much more object level, where the first step in a debate about where to go on vacation is just Bali or Alaska. You give the answer and then you focus in on more ...

For a broader class of questions, you can stay at object level reasoning. Now, if you want to get to metaethics, you would have to bring in the kind of reasoning. It should be a goal of ours to, for a fixed task, try to use the simplest kind of human reasoning possible, because then we should expect to get better results out of people.

Lucas: All right. Moving forward. Two things. The first that would be interesting would be if you could unpack this process of training up agents to be good debaters, and to be good predictors of human decision making regarding debates, what that's actually going to look like in terms of your experiments, currently, and your future experiments. Then, also just pivoting into discussing reasons for optimism and pessimism about debate as a model for AI alignment.

Geoffrey: On the experiment side, as I mentioned, we're trying to get into the natural language domain, because I think that's how humans debate and reason. We're doing a fair amount of work at OpenAI on core ML language modeling, so natural language processing, and then trying to take advantage of that to prototype these systems. At the moment, we're just doing what I would call zero step debate, or one step debate. It's just a single agent answering a question. You have question, answer, and then you have a human kind of judging whether the answer is good.

The task of predicting an answer is just read a bunch of text and predict a number. That is essentially just a standard NLP type task, and you can use standard methods from NLP on that problem. The hope is that because it looks so standard, we can sort of just paste the development on the capability side in natural language processing on the safety side. Predicting the result is just sort of use whatever most powerful natural language processing architecture is, and apply it to this task. Architecture and method.

Similarly, on the task of answering questions, that's also a natural language task, just a generative one. If you're answering questions, you just read a bunch of text that is maybe the context of the question, and you produce an answer, and that answer is just a bunch of words that you spit out via a language model. If you're doing, say, a two step debate, where you have question, answer, counterargument, then similarly, you have a language model that spits out an answer, and a language model that spits out the counterargument. Those can in fact be the same language model. You just flip the reward at some point. An agent is rewarded for answering and winning, and answering well while it's spitting out the answer, and then when it's spitting out the counteranswer, you just reward it for falsifying the answer. It's still just degenerative language task with some slightly exotic reward.

Going forwards, we expect there to need to be something like ... This is not actually high confidence. Maybe there's things like AlphaGo zero style tree search that are required to make this work very well on the generative side, and we will explore those as required. Right now, we need to falsify the statement that we can just do it with stock language modeling, which we're working on. Does that cover the first part?