Nature and evolution tend towards balance too. Rabbits don't proliferate until infinity so that there aren't enough wolves to eat them and wolves don't eat all the rabbits so there are none to eat next year. Deserts don't expand over the whole Earth. Seas reach a shore.

“The Best for the Group comes when everyone in the group does what's best for himself and the group," says the character of Nash in the movie, A Beautiful Mind.

The idea that AIs will find no possible reason to collaborate with us and no reason to combine forces makes zero sense and doesn't track with anything in evolutionary history. 

Thinking About Thinking Machines
In the end, how you think about intelligent machines says a lot more about you than it does about AI. 

It's a Rorschach test. 


People see what they want to see in AI.

If you're a person who spends all their time obsessing about the end of the world, you'll see that in AI too. If you spend all your time thinking about injustice and what can go wrong, you'll tend to see what can go wrong.

I'm an engineer and a creative writer. I love the possibilities of creating new things and when I see creativity I see the very essence of life itself. New ideas. New technology. As an engineer I'm great at imagining what can go wrong and finding ways to fix it. That's what engineers do.

It's also what engineers are doing right now with AI.

They're dealing with its problems as they happen.

People are promptly injecting ChatGPT and people are already coming up with solutions to stop it. That's the push-pull pattern of history. Problems lead to solutions again and again.

We're already aligning AI with our goals and OpenAI is one of the teams leading the way. OpenAI red teamed GPT-4 so that it's already much much more aligned that earlier LLMs. Expect that trend to continue. We don't need a pause. We need to build these systems and study them in depth so we can find ways to make them better. We can't imagine what they're like. We have to dissect the frog to know what's inside. That's how science works.

It's also likely that we're just around the corner from a breakthrough in our understanding of models with some many engineers and researchers working on it. That will dramatically accelerate our ability to align them.

But what if this time is different? What if the pattern of millions of years of technological integration is broken? What if we're horses and AI are cars? What if we're doomed to decline as intelligent machines take over the planet and lead to a future that doesn't include us or includes us less and less?

Here's where I admit that I don't spend much time worrying about the end of the world. If I'm a Trilobite, it's not my job to worry about the world of dinosaurs. If superintelligent machines gradually outmode us, like Homo Sapiens outmoding Cro-Magnon man, then so be it. Nothing lasts forever and frankly we've only been around a very, very short time when it comes to the dominant species on the planet anyway. We've been around just under 2 million years and the Trilobites ruled for 300 million. We've probably got a ways to go by that estimate.

And if we're around 300 million years from now, it's likely that new version of us that exists will be one that co-evolved and integrated with superintelligent machines. They're much more likely to be one of the main reasons we stick around that long than the reason we go up in flames.

Because really, what doesn't benefit from more intelligence?

Is anyone sitting around thinking I wish my supply chain was dumber? I wish cancer was harder to defeat. I wish drugs were harder to discover and materials were harder to create. I wish economics were more challenging to study and that we made worse decisions with less data.

Nobody.

Intelligence will weave its way into every single aspect of our lives, making our economy strong and faster, our lives longer and our systems more resilient and adaptable.

It will be an age of ambient intelligence.

Of course, something will be the end of us eventually.

Something we can't see or predict.

I don't worry too much about the end of the world and I don't recommend you spend much time on it either when there are plenty of more pressing problems to worry about now.

I'm an engineer. I take problems as they come and I do what engineers do best. I fix them. And I trust we'll keep doing that with AI and every other technology we invent or co-invent with our intelligent machine friends in the future. I believe there's a solution to every problem. A real solution, not a magical solution like let's shut it all down and stop all progress, which is absurd, unrealistic, and impossible.

If you choose to listen to people who have a problem for every solution instead, then you might as well get your bunker and bug out bag ready.

But while you're down there in the silo, with no windows and no light, I'll be up here, having a beer and a bite to eat with the people I love and bathing in the sun streaming in through the windows. At least if the end comes I won't have already lived it a million times before it happened and magnified my suffering.

As Robert Frost once wrote: "Some say the world will end in fire and some say in ice."

But I say when it comes to destruction, ice is just as nice as fire and will suffice.

Future History is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your email…
Subscribe





9 likes
Comments

Write a comment…
The Age of Industrialized AI
Where is AI Going Over the Next Two Decades? The Sci-Fi Story that AI Will Destroy All the Jobs Will Slowly Fade as AI Becomes More Deeply Collaborative…
DEC 26, 2022
56
The Turning Point for Truly Open AI is Now
Truly Open Source AI is the Future But Some Folks Are Trying to Kill It in Its Crib Because They Secretly Want to Keep All the Power for Themselves
DANIEL JEFFRIES
SEP 28, 2022
40
1
The Fantastic New World of AI Art Generators and Why Their Critics Get It All Wrong
AI Art Generators are Here and They're Poised to Change the Art World Forever but an Increasingly Bizarre and Strange Range of Reactions from the…
DANIEL JEFFRIES
AUG 5, 2022
23
9
See all
Ready for more?

Type your email…
Subscribe
© 2023 Daniel Jeffries
Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Start Writing
Get the app
Substack is the home for great writing