I definitely have total aphantasia. I think for me it just means I have no episodic memories or imagination, just semantic and muscle memory.

No thought ever makes any kind of sensory interference of any kind whatsoever. I argue that visual imagery is just a kind of play that people make based on their semantic memories, which helps explain why some people seem to claim to lose their mental imagery, since they are not the source of thought but a kind of "movie" generated from the semantic template.

And that mental imagery is a form of voluntary or lucid synthesia, and that it involves the eye muscles and jaw (for subvocalization).

I could argue that mental imagery is scientifically impossible, and that anyone who claims to do so is faking it or confused, but that just seems like a way to make a lot enemies. It seems possible that Galton proved the existence of mental visual imagery in 1890.

I do have mental imagery while dreaming, so it doesn't really seem impossible in principle, just impractical. I want everyone with hyperphantasia banned from driving unless they can prove they can turn it off or it isn't intrusive.

But it seems like 98% of people claim to see something in their head so maybe my theory that it is impossible is probably useless. I am told that even the word theory means "to see the gods" and then we have words like idea, idol, imagination, fantasy, all based on words for image.

It seems unbelievable that anyone should ever claim see anything in their head, but it can't just be a collective hallucination, as much as it seems to me that mental imagery would be a semantic confusion. The assertion that people have unconscious mental imagery seems almost insulting, it seems like an attempt to save face for the embarrassment of having to use the   incorrect term image to mean state. (In the Stanford article on mental imagery).

Anyways I really don't know how much I more I could argue that it isn't a conceptual confusion, and that it simpler, quicker, and more efficient to use semantic networks than mental imagery which I think is slow and inverts probabilities by making it seem like that combine like sums (making the mental "image" or episode more "memorable") rather than multiplying do become smaller. I am almost sure that no one wants to learn how to tune out mental imagery but I think I could teach a course on it. "Clear thinking" You always trace the outline of objects by tracing their outlines, never seeing it as a whole like a photograph or blotches of colors. Avoid watching cartoons, looking at characters, anime, or badly drawn or disproportionate art whenever possible. Imagine you are looking at everything through a straw, upside down.