POMOBABBLE: POSTMODERN NEWSPEAK' 
AND CONSTI'TUTIONAL "MEANING" 
FOR THE UNINITIATED 
Dennis W. Arrow2 
1. See generally GEORGE ORWELL, NINETEEN EIGHTY-FOUR, at app. 
(Harcourt, Brace & Co. 1949) (describing "Newspeak"); infra note 41 
(contemplating dictionaries). 
2. Professor of Law, Oklahoma City University. 
[A]t this moment there exists not the smallest prospect that my manuscript 
will ever see the light unless, by some miracle, it were to leave our belea- 
guered European fortress and bring to those without some breath of the 
secrets of our prison-house .... [O]nly because I consider that future readers 
will wish to know who and what the author is do I preface these disclosures 
with a few notes about myself.... 
... I am by nature wholly moderate, of a temper, I must say, both healthy 
and humane, addressed to reason and harmony... a scholar ... not lacking all 
contact with the arts ... but a son of the Muses in that academic sense which 
by preference regards itself as descended from the German humanists of the 
time of the "Poets." 
THOMAS MANN, DOCTOR FAUSTUS 3-4 (H.T. Lowe-Porter trans., Vintage Books 
1992) (1947). But not wishing to privilege even my personal (let alone my rela- 
tional) identity, see generally infra note 30 (quoting Kenneth Karst on "us"), over 
the context of my discourse, I have, in the interests of avoiding crypto-hegemonic 
behavior, left the traditional identification until this point in the text. The "voice," 
the astute, but cf. infra text following note 30 (defining "equality"), reader will 
note, will shift throughout this article: I certainly (oops! see infra text following 
note 30 (defining "epistemology")) wouldn't want to privilege any of my voices. 
See JACQUES DERRIDA, The Ends of Man, in MARGINS OF PHILOSOPHY 109, 135 
(Alan Bass ed. & trans., University of Chicago Press 1982) (1972) ("[W]hat we 
need, perhaps, as Nietzsche said, is a change of 'style'; and if there is style, 
Nietzsche reminded us, it must be plural." (emphasis added)); Jacques Derrida, 
Living On * Border Lines (James Hulbert trans.), in DECONSTRUCTION AND CRITI- 
CISM 75, 85-86 (Harold Bloom and William Golding eds., 1979) [hereinafter Der- 
rida, Border Lines] ("There is the double narrative, the narrative of the vision 
enclosed in the general narrative carried on by the same narrator. The line that 
separates the enclosed narrative from the other- [here, Derrida reproduces a line 
similar to that between the text and footnotes of this article]- marks the upper 
edge of a space that will never be closed." (emphasis deleted)); cf. KEN KESEY, 
SOMETIMES A GREAT NOTION (1964) (providing an example of the plural style); 
VLADIMIR NABOKOV, PALE FIRE (1962) (same); FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY, NOTES 
FROM UNDERGROUND (Richard Pevear & Larissa Volokhonsky trans., Vintage 
Classics 1994) (1864) (same); CHARLES DICKENS, BLEAK HOUSE (Oxford Univ. 
Press 1948) (1853) (same); Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Translator's Preface to 
JACQUES DERRIDA, OF GRAMMATOLOGY at ix, xxix (Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak 
trans., 1976) (characterizing "Derrida's shifts between commentary, interpretation, 
'fiction,' in the works immediately following Of Grammatology and his typographi- 
cal play with modes of discourse in Marges or Glas" as within the plural style); 
infra MEZZATEXT (between text and footnotes) (eschewing "dualities," and one- 

Newspeak was the official language of Oceania .... In the year 
1984 there was not as yet anyone who used Newspeak as his sole means 
of communication, either in speech or writing. The leading articles in 
the Times were written in it, but this was a tour de force which could 
only be carried out by a specialist .... [But] all Party members 
tend[ed] to use Newspeak words and grammatical constructions more 
and more in their everyday speech. 
The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide