I've been toying with the concept that perhaps we're already time travelers and that it's so commonplace, that we don't even notice it happening.

Just look at our languages.  We have fiction.  Could, Would, Should, Might, Did, Will, .. all things not happening now.

Even though our bodies seem to go forward, our minds freely travel interdimensionally in everyday speech, going forward, backwards, skipping around, investigating alternative possibilities, coming up with universes that we don't see....

Why are we even able to do it at all?

That amazes me.

KU - Jan 31, 2015

chatGPT:
It is fascinating how language can allow us to consider and explore events that have not yet occurred or events that are not physically possible. Through language, we have the ability to imagine, speculate, and make connections in a way that transcends time and space.

This is a powerful tool for creativity and problem-solving, and it's no wonder that our languages have developed over time to include verb tenses that allow us to describe past, present, and future events.

Moreover, the human mind is incredibly versatile and can be thought of as existing in multiple dimensions, including time. When we think about the future or the past, or even imagine alternative scenarios, our minds are effectively time traveling within the constraints of our own experience and imagination.

This ability to think beyond the present moment is a defining characteristic of human consciousness, and it is what allows us to make plans, learn from history, and create art and stories that engage and inspire others.

* * *

*Time Entanglement - it's easy, really when you know how.*
I somewhat expect that the Universe works like this:

The author of a book writes in a timeline. Born, Lives, Dies. Ok, boring arrow of time.

But someone reads the words of the author 100 years later and understands them. At that moment, their brainwave patterns/thought processes may be the same as the author's intention* at that moment.

Also, every person who _ever_ read or will read that book is also connected to the author at those moments of understanding as well.

So, do their combined awarenessness also go back in time, inspiring the author to write the words in the first place?

I don't see any reason why not.

And of course, it would travel the regular forward way as well: the authors intention at writing is a combination of pieces of the thoughts/feelings/impressions of every person they've ever encountered, every book they're ever read, experience they've ever had, coalescing into concepts that are penned on paper at the present moment they write them. So.. > going forward . the present moment and < back in time as well.

*also unintention as well.

-Kenneth Udut 1/30/15

[thanks to Amy Gregory and Chris Gregory for inspiration on this]