Spherepop 

ğ˜ğ˜°ğ˜¸ ğ˜µğ˜° ğ˜—ğ˜­ğ˜¢ğ˜º ğ˜šğ˜±ğ˜©ğ˜¦ğ˜³ğ˜¦ğ˜±ğ˜°ğ˜±

( How ( + ( - ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ) ( - ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ) play ) spherepop: ( (Find the ( innermost bubble ) ) and then pop as many ( + b u b b l e s ) ) as you can ( . ) ) )

https://www.google.com/url?q=https://cardinalscs.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/circle-of-eval-racket-code-binary-code-key.pdf

&usg=AOvVaw1CLJxSt6IClinUXcLmj_9b


User
How to play spherepop.

ChatGPT
Spherepop is a game where you need to pop as many bubbles as you can. To play the game:

1. Identify the innermost bubble in the cluster.
2. Pop that bubble.
3. Repeat step 1 and 2 until there are no more bubbles left.
4. Try to pop as many bubbles as you can within the time limit.

The game can be played on a computer or mobile device by clicking or tapping on the bubbles. It requires quick reflexes and good hand-eye coordination.

* * *

ChatGPT
Thank you for the clarification. I understand now that the topic of our conversation is a fictional 3D programming language called Spherepop, where programs are written by growing bubbles from seed and evaluated by popping them with a spaceship.

Although there is currently no prototype, we can use our imagination to envision how this language might work.

* * *

ChatGPT
I'm sorry, but it seems like you're still describing the rules and controls for the game of Spherepop.

However, Spherepop is a fictional 3D programming language and game that does not actually exist.

While it's fun to imagine what a game like Spherepop would be like, unfortunately, there is no way to actually play it.

User
Sorry, the game is called Haplopraxis (simple practice). It is a game I am working on, spherepop the game is based on spherepop the language (it is just racket with circles (spheres) instead of opening and closing of parenthesis, which represent entering and exiting the parentheses. 

ChatGPT
Ah, I see. Thank you for the clarification. 

So, Haplopraxis is a game you are working on, and it is based on the Spherepop language, which is essentially Racket with spheres instead of parentheses.

Is there anything else you would like to know or discuss about the game or the language?

User
Just give the rules and keyboard controls as far as you know them. It is space exploration game and a typing tutor.

ChatGPT
Sure! Based on the information you have provided so far, here are the rules and keyboard controls for Haplopraxis:

Rules:
Explore the space by flying your spaceship and visiting different planets.

When you arrive at a planet, you will be given a typing challenge to complete.

The challenge consists of typing out a phrase or sentence correctly within a certain time limit.

If you complete the challenge successfully, you will earn points and move on to the next planet.

If you fail the challenge, you will lose a life. You have a limited number of lives, so be careful!

The game ends when you either run out of lives or complete all the challenges.

Keyboard controls:
Use the arrow keys to fly your spaceship.

Press Enter to begin a typing challenge.
Type the challenge using your keyboard.

Press Enter again to submit your answer.

If you need to erase a mistake, use the Backspace key.

If you want to skip a challenge, press the Spacebar.

If you need to pause the game, press the Escape key.

If you want to quit the game, press Alt+F4 (on Windows) or Command+Q (on Mac).

Note: These rules and keyboard controls are based on the information you provided earlier, so they may not be entirely accurate or complete.

Please let me know if there is anything else you would like me to add or clarify.

User
Yes, explain the rules about the global reset for all players key (g) and how it results in a game over, but you can inoculate yourself against a reset by enabling autoblink.

If you have autoblink enabled and you hit the g key you will still get reset in time (to the beginning of the game) but you will not lose your points, each point is associated with a marked vocabulary item which forms a "dictionary" of the planets you've visited in terms of the bubbles you popped.

You have to blink to avoid popping the outermost bubble.

ChatGPT
Sure, I can explain that further.

The "g" key triggers a global reset for all players in the game. When the global reset occurs, all players are returned to the beginning of the game, meaning that they lose all progress and have to start over.

However, players can protect themselves from a global reset by enabling autoblink. Autoblink is a setting that increases the chances of not being reset when the "g" key is pressed.

With autoblink enabled, if a global reset occurs, the player will still be reset in time, but they will not lose their points, which are associated with marked vocabulary items representing the planets they have visited in terms of the bubbles they have popped.

To avoid popping the outermost bubble, players have to blink while passing through the boundary. If they do not blink, the bubble will pop, and the player will lose points.

I hope that helps clarify the rules of the game!

User
It does, thank you. But you don't lose points for popping a bubble, you lose all your points when the game is reset, unless you are blinking.

You want to not pop certain bubbles because you should look to find the most nested bubble (innermost scope).

ChatGPT
I apologize for the confusion. Thank you for correcting me. You are correct that popping a bubble does not result in a loss of points.

The points are only lost when the game is reset, except for players who are blinking, who will not lose their points. 

And you are also correct that finding the most nested bubble (innermost scope) is important in the game. Thank you for clarifying these points.

User
Ok a final summary.

ChatGPT
Sure! Here's a summary of the topics we covered in this conversation:

We started by discussing the impact of a researcher's measurement choice on performance.

Then we talked about Spherepop, a hypothetical 3D programming language where programs are written by growing bubbles and evaluated by popping them.

We then shifted to discussing Haplopraxis, a space exploration and typing tutor game. The goal of the game is to explore planets by flying a spaceship and popping bubbles associated with vocabulary words.

You lose all your points if the game is reset, except if you are blinking, which can be enabled with autoblink or super autoblink.

The global reset key is 'g'.

Finally, we clarified some of the details about the game, including the controls for flying the spaceship and the mechanics of popping bubbles and avoiding resets.

I hope this summary is helpful!

User
Yes it is, thank you.

ChatGPT
You're welcome! Don't hesitate to reach out if you have any other questions or if there's anything else I can help you with.