Specifically, Bayesian Inference or something that approximates it. As evolution proceeds, life is modeling the world and constantly updating its beliefs about it to be more accurate. Writing for Aeon, Karl Friston says "Inference is actually quite close to a theory of everything of consciousness, evolution and even life itself"

According to his free energy principle in order stay ordered, an adaptive system must engage in Bayesian Learning to deal with environmental uncertainty. 

Friston's vision of Bayesian Inference as a cosmic process has been called Universal Bayesianism. By unifying these unified systems theories, and updating them with new insights gleaned from thermodynamics, information theory, cybernetics and dynamical systems theory, we get the Integrated Evolutionary Synthesis As you can see, it's not really my theory, but the paradigm that's emerging from the integration of the sciences that is underway.

I'm just one of the people putting the puzzle pieces together, and that puzzle is pretty poetic. So poetic that, it may be easier to explain in poetry: "We find ourselves in a pro-life universe, but that universe is not conscious, at least not at first. It is often assumed that life is cosmically insignificant because at present it occupies such a small region of the universe.

A universe that seems so hostile and inhospitable to life but both those assessments are short-sighted. What my book hopes to convince you of, is that life has persevered on Earth for four billion years, not IN SPITE of the challenges the universe presents it with, but BECAUSE of them.

Problems create progress, we call that Popper's principle and it's essentially the old saying: "Necessity is the mother of Invention" applied to evolutionary theory. To understand the integrated evolutionary synthesis, we can think of Life as a game and we can call that game "the game of Life" The goal of the game of Life is to continue playing the game of Life. The Challenge is set by the second law of Thermodynamics, which says that ordered systems naturally tend toward disorder.

This sounds like bad news for life, but it can evade disorder and sustain itself IF it can extract energy from the environment. Fortunately there's plenty of free energy all around us so unlocking it is just a matter of finding the right design or configuration through trial-and-error search.

If the second law poses an existential challenge to life, than Darwinian evolution is life's answer to that challenge. As described by Dan Dennett in Darwin's Dangerous idea, Life blindly explores the space of possible designs to find solutions/adaptations to the problem staying far from equilibrium or survival. 


Solutions are adaptations that help the organism extract energy and avoid threats. While the errors are the dysfunctional designs that get filtered out by natural selection. As organisms compete for survival, the species evolves through phylogenetic learning, which is generational learning.

As this learning proceeds, the internal model of the organism gets updated in a Bayesian Manner and life becomes better at predicting the world around it. That's a lot of information to process. So let me sum up phylogenetic learning poetically: "As selection carefully calls and prunes biological variation, Nature 
applies her filter to the fruits of gene mutation Through the brutal and swift removal of the errors at adaptation Life learns from Death what not to do and that's knowledge creation. The other evolutionary mechanism on this diagram is called self-organization and it's been largely ignored by evolutionary biologists until recently. Self-organization or ontogenetic learning, also occurs to the darwinian algorithm of variation-and-selection, but because it doesn't involve replication, it has been called blind variation and selective retention Simply stated an evolving system exploring a variety of internal configurations will discover and retain increasingly stable states of existence. We call this "selection for persistence" or "selection for stability" As Richard Dawkins points out: "Darwin's survival of the fittest is really a special case of a more general law of survival of the stable." Because working together rather than alone will make energy extraction easier, there's always a thermodynamic benefit to cooperating with other agents We call that Synergy. For this reason interacting agents will often spontaneously organize to create a larger system and this process happens recursively, creating a hierarchy of nested systems that continuously grows as new levels emerge