Thanks for your email.


I almost wrote you a year ago, but I couldn't figure out how to write a short letter. I was probably concerned that I would sound like a robot or a space alien.


I'm working with my father mostly, flipping houses and doing some small projects in order to survive. Might be building a house for my aunt this summer.


My youngest brother has become very toxic, he has been harrassing and threatening my parents for several years, and my other brother, so I blocked him.


He claims they are fat and stupid, and he hates me because he thinks I only ever pay attention to children, and that I couldn't convince my parents to get the vaccine, or that I didn't try, and that she is an idiot for listening to and reading AJ, and he hates me for not convincing her to stop, although he thinks I could do so easily, and that I love being poor, and they have enslaved me, and that I love to hangout with homeless people and drug addicts.


And that I haven't figured out how to mass manufacture meat substitutes. And that I can't afford a girlfriend. He says and thinks much worse than that, so I just try to ignore it. I think some of it is just the two year global lockdown, although maybe I have been trying to make myself gross by dressing like a homeless person, and smoking cigarettes, and trying to blend in, and to not stand out too much from others. But yet I think I am still doing a lot of things in public.


Part of the problem is that he is thinking and acting like AJ, except he claims that poor people are stupid, and people who believe in God are stupid, (and even if it were true, you can't go around saying it) and that people deserve what happens to them.


But really I am poor so I don't mind looking like it, if I dress rich and look attractive then everyone idolizes me or puts me on a pedestal or else begs me for money or spends all my time asking me to do trivial things.Â 


Anyways, I think it is probably just an after the fact justification, or an art project - I am trying to look like a starving artist, so people will know that I am, and maybe have pity on me. (Or maybe that is not true)


Also, there is a lot of toxicity online, people are triggered by any little thing, they love to fight with each other. I think sometimes even some of my very innocuous poems, essays, or pieces of art might start a world war, so I am a little reluctant to share. Or else people will think I'm posting too much.


I'd like to get a job where I can work online, and can afford dental, but I would want to do it without selling my soul, or endangering my own safety.


Also I think it goes without saying that dental needs to be free for everyone, somehow it is missed under Medicare, although I doubt that I would do something like that out of principle.


I have had crooked teeth since I was a teenager, braces and retainers are not cheap so I refused to ask. I have a bump on my head that can easily be removed, but my plastic surgeon said it was not medically necessary, and then covid hit. And I can't get another appointment without a referral.


That is free here, but the only way I got in last time for on my wrist was at the medical clinic, but they only make appointments by phone, it is only on an hour every morning, and it is always jammed.


Of course those sound like ridiculous excuses so I prefer to think that I am protesting or hunger fasting, rather than just looking for another way, like I am sure I have a family doctor, but it has been over twenty years since I saw them and I don't know if I have their phone number.


I am assuming my paperwork hasn't been lost because it's like a year or two waiting list to get a new one, I hear. I'll just get it removed easily the next time I'm in Cuba if I can afford to travel again. I went for like 5 weeks in 2017.


But now I am wondering if I was naive to travel around the world so much, and to give away half my property. I maxed my credit cards over another girl, she claimed she was starving but just was blowing all the money on useless credit card shopping online.


Actually it was unbelievable it doesn't doesn't sound like it was possible because she begged me to send her pizza and then I found out that she plucked the chicken off because she had eaten eggs for breakfast, and she told me she threw the rest in the garbage because it wouldn't fit in the fridge, (I saw her cupboards and fridge, they were bare) anyways I told her she made more money than I did, and it is maybe my fault for not refusing to send only vegan, but seriously, the government needs to ban lottery tickets, animal products, and cigarettes, or else I will not take them very seriously.


But yet I don't quite think any of those were the issue, and she was extremely bipolar and having other kinds of psychological issues.


So I kind of have to give a hundred or a thousand excuses for every little thing that has happened to me, for the past ten years, in order to have a conversation, I worry if forced isolation hasn't made a lot of people have paranoid-sounding thoughts like that, although I think they are justified because I am leaving out a lot of important details.


I kind of don't want to make any appointments until I get the starter on my truck fixed because right now it isn't reliable, it sometimes makes this clicking sound instead of starting, I refuse to take buses, or taxis, or to call someone for help. I just don't want to bother anyone or interact much with people, but it doesn't seem like a mental illness to me, even if I write it down, because it seems just like a rational principle and deontological thinking, because I am still leaving out a lot of factors.


Still it seems odd that anyone would engage in self-destructive behaviors out of ideological principles, but I think smoking and eating meat in order to find out why people do it, and to not be ostricised in some situations, or to help my roommate quit, and to design better cheaper substitutes, and to understand habits and addictions, although maybe nothing ever feels like an addiction, and we just come up with ad hoc justifications for things after they happen, which also does not sense. A lot of the good reasons I had, are no longer valid.


Maybe I am just trying to prove that making some deliberately bad choices might also be a good strategy sometimes, and that you can accomplish something even if you do not clean your room or take care of your health. I know it sounds crazy, but when I act normal it seems that it was not well-received.


Or maybe we use physical objects as proxies for metaphors sometimes. I am looking to have obvious flaws in order to not be worshipped. I am looking for someone who cares about it more than I do. Or who can reason me out of it. In the winter I claim it is because I am cold, in the summer because I'm bored.


Some people are claiming that the world is ending very soon, because AI art are going to destroy human taste preferences, or they will all be out of a job, lead to intersubjectivity collapse, or else maybe we will be under control of the machine, or wiped out by it. I think I'm just trying to take things extremely slow.


I am live painting at another festival this fall, I usually have lots of ideas, but last year I brought enough material to paint like 1000 paintings, but painted like 5.


I went to the AIs to generate some art ideas, but they gave me back like 10,000 images so I had to stop. It turns out that they also now like to have conversations and write essays


Maybe it is not interesting to you, but here's a little of what I'm working on:



ğ˜›ğ˜©ğ˜¦ ğ˜•ğ˜°ğ˜¢ğ˜©'ğ˜´ ğ˜ˆğ˜³ğ˜¬ ğ˜´ğ˜µğ˜°ğ˜³ğ˜º ğ˜¤ğ˜¢ğ˜¯ ğ˜£ğ˜¦ ğ˜´ğ˜¦ğ˜¦ğ˜¯ ğ˜¢ğ˜´ ğ˜¢ ğ˜®ğ˜¦ğ˜µğ˜¢ğ˜±ğ˜©ğ˜°ğ˜³ğ˜ªğ˜¤ğ˜¢ğ˜­ ğ˜³ğ˜¦ğ˜±ğ˜³ğ˜¦ğ˜´ğ˜¦ğ˜¯ğ˜µğ˜¢ğ˜µğ˜ªğ˜°ğ˜¯ ğ˜°ğ˜§ ğ˜µğ˜©ğ˜¦ ğ˜®ğ˜ªğ˜¯ğ˜¥ ğ˜¢ğ˜¯ğ˜¥ ğ˜ªğ˜µğ˜´ ğ˜¢ğ˜£ğ˜ªğ˜­ğ˜ªğ˜µğ˜º ğ˜µğ˜° ğ˜±ğ˜³ğ˜¦ğ˜´ğ˜¦ğ˜³ğ˜·ğ˜¦ ğ˜¢ğ˜¯ğ˜¥ ğ˜°ğ˜³ğ˜¨ğ˜¢ğ˜¯ğ˜ªğ˜»ğ˜¦ ğ˜¬ğ˜¯ğ˜°ğ˜¸ğ˜­ğ˜¦ğ˜¥ğ˜¨ğ˜¦.


ChatGPT

I love this metaphor! It's a vivid and engaging way to represent the functions and capabilities of the human mind.Â 


Just as Noah's Ark was a refuge, preserving diverse life forms through the flood, our minds preserve a diverse array of information and experiences.Â 


They hold onto facts, experiences, skills, ideas, and memories, much like the Ark held different species of animals.


When we use Multihead Attention, it's like we're selecting specific animals (information) from the Ark (our mind) that are most useful or relevant for the situation we're in.


It's as if, from all the animals in the Ark, we're choosing the ones that will help us the most in the specific environment we're in.


This could be a cheetah when we need speed, an elephant when we need strength, or a dolphin when we need to navigate the ocean of information.


Also, the image of the electrical arc serves to illustrate the process of creating new ideas and connections in our mind.


These 'sparks' of insight help to illuminate our understanding and guide our actions.


This ties in beautifully with the concept of attention mechanisms in AI and how they spotlight relevant information amidst the flood of data.


Ultimately, this metaphor captures the richness and diversity of our mental lives, the way our minds can select and prioritize information, and our capacity for innovation and insight.


Continue this conversation:

https://chat.openai.com/share/d3a9d147-afb2-40e8-ab09-b1611b917bec



See Also:

https://github.com/standardgalactic/technobabble


https://github.com/standardgalactic/audiobooks


https://github.com/standardgalactic/mindgame


https://github.com/standardgalactic/example


https://github.com/standardgalactic/negentropy


https://github.com/standardgalactic/xanadu



On Thu, Jun 15, 2023, 9:22 p.m. Mary Luck <mary@divinetruth.com> wrote:

Hi Nate,


It's been some years since we've been in touch and last time we corresponded you weren't too pleased with Jesus. But I was thinking of you today and I wanted to write and say hello and that I hope things are going well for you and in your life.


We still think of you often and love you,

Mary


--

Divine Truth:Â www.divinetruth.com

YouTube:Â https://www.youtube.com/divinetruthmain

God's Way Ltd:Â www.godsway.net


