PROCEEDINGS OF THE 
AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY 
Volume 130, Number 3, Pages 841–847 
S 0002-9939(01)06067-1 
Article electronically published on August 29, 2001 
COMPLETING THE CONFORMAL BOUNDARY 
OF A SIMPLY CONNECTED LORENTZ SURFACE 
ROBERT W. SMYTH 
(Communicated by Wolfgang Ziller) 
Abstract. This paper extends Kulkarni’s conformal boundary ∂L for a sim- 
ply connected Lorentz surface L to a compact conformal boundary ∂cL. The 
procedure used is analogous to Carath´ eodory’s construction (in the def i nite 
metric setting) of prime ends from the accessible points of a bounded simply 
connected planar domain. The space ∂cL of conformal boundary elements is 
homeomorphic to the circle, and contains Kulkarni’s conformal boundary ∂L 
as a dense subspace. 1. Introduction 
A Lorentz surface L = (S,[h]) is an oriented, connected C∞2-manifold 
S to- 
gether with a conformal class of indef i nite metrics on S. Such a conformal class 
of indef i nite metrics determines a naturally ordered pair of smooth null direction 
i elds X and Y on S, with X and Y distinct at each point of S. Local coordinates 
x,y on S are called proper null coordinates (with respect to [h]) if 
∂ 
∂x lies along X, 
∂ 
∂y lies along Y and h = 2Bdxdy for some positive function B. The inextendible 
integral curves of X are referred to as X-lines and the inextendible integral curves 
of Y are called Y-lines. These two families of null lines capture the structure of L. 
Although this structure is locally trivial, it has some interesting global properties. 
(See [12] or [5] for a much more thorough presentation.) For later reference, we 
note here that the span of a null line γ is the set of all points on null lines which 
cross γ. The joint span of two null lines of opposite type (which meet each other) 
is the intersection of their spans. 
There are stark contrasts between the consequences of conformality in the def- 
inite and indef i nite metric cases. For example, the celebrated Koebe uniformiza- 
tion theorem shows that there are exactly 3 conformally distinct simply connected 
Riemann surfaces, but there exist uncountably many conformally distinct simply 
connected Lorentz surfaces. (See [9] or [10].) While C1conformal maps (and even 
1-quasiconformal maps) between Riemann surfaces must be smooth, there exist Cj 
conformal equivalences between Lorentz surfaces which are not Cj+1conformally 
Received by the editors April 17, 2000 and, in revised form, September 5, 2000. 
2000 Mathematics Subject Classif i cation. Primary 53C50, 53A30. 
Key words and phrases. Indef i nite metric, conformal geometry, foliation theory. 
c?2001 American Mathematical Society 
841 
842ROBERT W. SMYTH 
equivalent for j = 0,1,.... (See [8].) Nevertheless, this paper develops a construc- 
tion of conformal boundary elements for any simply connected Lorentz surface in a 
way which is closely analogous to Carath´ eodory’s construction of prime ends. Sev- 
eral references are made in this paper to [7] in order to highlight the analogy. (All 
page number references to [7] refer to volume 3.) Alternatively, one may consult 
the treatment of Carath´ eodory’s construction in [1] or [2].