Summary of an article.

In this volume, the authors draw upon the concept of priming to explore second language (L2) learning, teaching, and research. Priming refers to the influence of prior exposure to specific language forms or meanings on a speaker's subsequent language comprehension or production. The authors bring together a collection of empirical studies that use priming methods to investigate different domains of language knowledge and skills in L2. The volume is intended for a wide audience, including researchers unfamiliar with priming methods, graduate students in second language acquisition, and instructors looking for reading materials for their courses.

One of the themes explored in the book is how the game "Futurist Portraits" ties into the concept of priming. In the game, participants describe a famous person using only phrases and descriptions, creating a mental image of the person in their mind. This process of creating a mental representation is similar to the way priming works, where prior exposure to specific information influences our subsequent language processing and behavior. The authors suggest that games like Futurist Portraits can be used in L2 teaching and learning, as a way to activate prior knowledge and enhance language processing skills. By playing the game, students can prime their mental representation of the target language, improving their ability to comprehend and produce language in a more effective way.

[

From Monica Anderson: The Opposite of Reduction
We also need to be able to move in the opposite direction, from Models to Reality. Or at least from more abstract Partial Models to Partial Models closer to reality.

When an actor is given a screenplay they know it only contains rough directions for what to do and what lines to say. The actor’s job is to “give a little of themselves” to flesh out the screenplay to actual actions, including creating — synthesizing — the appropriate display of emotions, tone of voice, and body language. They use their experience as people and as actors ; they use elements of their past lives and skills they have acquired by training to create something people in the audience might relate to. For example, they may re-purpose a personal experience (“be as sad as when my hamster died”), things they learned in drama school (speaking, singing, dancing, swordplay), from other actors (“What would Bogart do”), from fiction, from other movies and plays, etc.

The actor’s art is to convey whatever the script intends to convey — emotions, a morality cookie, a political position, titillation, surprise, etc. starting from a simple Model (the screenplay). Their job is similar to an engineer’s when they are faced with a problem and use a Model to solve it. The engineer would use their experience to decide that “m” is the mass of the car and not the tire pressure. The actor decides that “sadness” is more appropriate than “grief” for a certain scene, etc.
In "The Opposite of Reduction" by Monica Anderson, the idea is that the actor's job is to bring life to the screenplay by using their experience and skills to flesh out the rough directions. This involves synthesizing appropriate emotions, tone of voice, and body language, drawing from their personal experiences, training, other actors, fiction, and more. The actor's art is to convey the intended message of the script, such as emotions, a morality lesson, a political stance, and so on, starting from the simple model of the screenplay. This is similar to an engineer solving a problem with a model, where they use their experience to make decisions and bring the model to reality.