Ocularum - observable space, the particle horizon.  Monoturn - the only-version, the uniturn or monoverse. Literal translation of "universe" a unit of time equal to approximately 14 billion years. Lamphron - dark matter. From Greek word for "clear." A relatively weakly interacting particle formed in the early universe that neither absorbs nor emits light, yet can be seen through gravitational lensing or inferred through mathematical analysis of the rotational curves of galaxies and galaxy clusters. Lamphrodyne - dark energy. The tendency for space to fall "outwards." The feedback mechanism by which vacuum creates more vacuum, uniformly stretching space. Graviton - the exchange particle of gravity. A very small fluctuation in the space-time field, that causes matter and energy to congeal; to pull together with a force that is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. The "stickiness of stuff." Quark - a very small elementary particle that has a fractional charge, various "flavors" called "color," and always comes in "chunks." Electron - small, elementary particle with a negative charge which "orbits" or "piles onto" proton-neutron chunks and is responsible for electricity. Lepton - a very small particle Fermion - non-stacking, non-overlapping particles which make up matter. Photon - the exchange particle of the electromagnetic force, a self-propagating disturbance in electric and magnetic field space. A wiggling electric field creates a magnetic field which creates an electric field, and so on. Travels at a maximum fixed velocity in a perfect vacuum. Gluon - the exchange particle of the weak-force which helps glue quarks together. Meson - middle particle, a quark and an antiquark. Boson - stacking, overlapping particles which hold matter together. Includes force-exchange particles responsible for gravity and light. Proton - two up-quarks and a down-quark. Neutron - two down-quarks and an up-quark. Baryon - ordinary matter; made from three quarks. Hadron - a baryon or a meson. Atom - a clump of positively-charged protons, usually with some stabilizing chargeless neutrons and some negatively-charged electrons. Molecule - a clump of atoms