The media, including news articles in both Nature and Science, have recently celebrated the Integrated 
Information Theory (IIT) as a ‘leading’ and empirically tested theory of consciousness1–5. We are writing 
as researchers with some relevant expertise to express our concerns. 
The media coverage sprang from a public event where the authors of a large-scale adversarial 
collaboration shared their findings, which were reported as empirically testing and partially supporting 
IIT1–5. This message was communicated directly to journalists and the general public prior to the preprint 
being available1,2, and hence, prior to peer-review. The experiments seem very skillfully executed by a 
large group of trainees across different labs. However, by design the studies only tested some 
idiosyncratic predictions made by certain theorists, which are not really logically related to the core ideas 
of IIT3,6,7, as one of the authors himself also acknowledges8. The findings therefore do not support the 
claims that the theory itself was actually meaningfully tested, or that it holds a ‘dominant’, 
‘well-established’, or ‘leading’ status1–5,8. This important nuance was unfortunately lost in the media 1 
coverage1–5. These claims of dominance have also been questioned in the scientific community9–11, yet 
they have been repeatedly broadcast to the public by proponents of IIT over the years6,8,12–16. 
　 
IIT is an ambitious theory, but some scientists have labeled it as pseudoscience15,16. According to IIT, an 
inactive grid of connected logic gates that are not performing any useful computation can be 
conscious—possibly even more so than humans17; organoids created out of petri-dishes, as well as 
human fetuses at very early stages of development, are likely conscious according to the theory18,19; on 
some interpretations, even plants may be conscious20. These claims have been widely considered 
untestable, unscientific, ‘magicalist’, or a ‘departure from science as we know it’15,21–27. Given its 
panpsychist commitments, until the theory as a whole—not just some hand-picked auxiliary components 
trivially shared by many others or already known to be true28–31—is empirically testable, we feel that the 
pseudoscience label should indeed apply. Regrettably, given the recent events and heightened public 
interest, it has become especially necessary to rectify this matter. 
If IIT is either proven or perceived by the public as such, it will not only have a direct impact on clinical 
practice concerning coma patients32, but also a wide array of ethical issues ranging from current debates 
on AI sentience13and its regulation, to stem cell research, animal and organoid testing18, and abortion19. 
Our consensus is not that IIT and its variants decidedly lack intellectual merit22. But with so much at 
stake, it is essential to provide a fair and truthful perspective on the status of the theory. As researchers, 
we have a duty to protect the public from scientific misinformation. 
Therefore, we hope to make clear that despite its significant media attention, IIT requires meaningful 
empirical tests before being heralded as a ‘leading’ or ‘well-established’ theory. Its idiosyncratic claims 
and potentially far-reaching ethical implications necessitate a measured representation.