A simulation of the dynamic perception of the Necker cube in terms of a two-level quantum system, e.g. that of the hydrogen tunneling states of the ammonia molecules associated with the 24 GHz maser frequency, indicates that the neuro-ph ysiological transformation leading. through a symmetry reduction, to perceptual reversal is controlled by the principles of quantum mechanics. 

The black holes entropic information formula 
solves the problem of the black hole information 
paradox by explaining the information processes 
involved in entropy for black holes down to the 
quantum level independently of the area 
horizon’s law by providing a sufficient 
microscopic description of how this entropy 
arises. The black holes entropic information 
formula shows that the process of black holes 
evaporation is consistent with the unitarity 
principle. Indeed, the black holes entropic 
information formula calculate the Hawking 
radiation encoding the entangled quantum 
information of the initial considered black hole. 
We have showed in [3]; that in the framework of 
black hole, the entropic Information formula 
taking in account the mass of bit of information at 
the Hawking temperature is equal to the 
universal bound originally found by Jacob 
Bekenstein: because black 
hole saturates exactly the bound. The fact is that 
the black-hole entropy is also the maximal 
entropy that can be obtained by the Bekenstein 
bound, wherein, the Bekenstein bound becomes 
an equality. Moreover, the equality between 
black holes entropic information formula and the 
Von Neumann entropy, made possible by an 
ingenious proposal of Casini [22-30] to equal the 
difference between the expectation value of the 
modular Hamiltonian in the excited state and the 
vacuum state, KV = tr (K ρ ) − tr (K ρ ) to 2 π R 
E [22], as the black holes entropic information 
formula is also equal to the universal bound. This 
leads to formulation of gravitational fine-grained 
entropy in regard to the entropic information 
theory. Until now, it was not possible to express 
the gravitational fine-grain entropy of a black hole 
using the rules of gravity [46]. However, the black 
holes entropic information formula can calculate 
the entropy of the black hole independently of the 
area horizon’s law and avoiding the ultraviolet 
divergences. Indeed, the ultraviolet divergences 
can be avoided by taking differences between 
quantities computed in an excited state and the 
same quantities computed in the vacuum state. 
The black holes entropic information formula 
expresses the gravitational fine grained black 
hole entropy by a semiclassical gravity approach. 
The black holes entropic information formula as 
new formulation of Bekenstein–Hawking entropy 
additionally including the information notion and 
the time of evaporation of the considered black 
hole permits to express the black hole entropy 
down to the quantum level independently of the 
area horizon’s law permitting to the entropy of 
Hawking radiation to be entangled with the initial 
considered black hole seen as a whole quantum 
system. The black holes entropy which turns out 
to be a special case of the Ryu–Takayanagi 
conjecture” [16]. Ryu–Takayanagi formula being 
Denis; PSIJ, 26(4): 1-16, 2022; Article no.PSIJ.90251 
14 
a general formula for the fine-grained entropy of 
quantum systems coupled to gravity [17]. That 
put the accent on the emergence quantum 
gravity process through the fundamentality of the 
entangled quantum information. All those 
informational processes lead to news 
perspectives in the approach of theoretical 
physics where we can see entangled quantum 
information as the building block of the universe, 
responsible of the emergent gravity, and being a 
keystone in the quantum entanglement 
processes, where entanglement doesn’t create 
entropy, but it is entropy, in the sense of 
information. Moreover, we can see the 
implication of the concept of information in the 
measurement problem indeed the collapse of the 
wave function is due to the fact that when a 
measure is taken, this is taking information out…. 
measurer absorbs information about system so 
modify the system, the wave function is 
collapsing because information is absorbed. We 
can envisage information as existing by itself as 
information is code, and code is what is create 
the process but is itself the process. We can 
even envisage some more deep implications as: 
“No bits, no structure, no existence”. “If 
consciousness exists before information, 
consciousness has nothing to know, indeed no 
consciousness without information”. “You must 
know that universe doesn’t need you to exist”.