1.3 Active Inference: Be hav ior from First Princi ples 
This diversity is a blessing for biology but challenging for formal theories of 
brain and mind. Broadly, there are two perspectives we could take on this. 
One perspective is that dif fer ent biological adaptations, neural pro cesses 
(e.g., synaptic exchanges and brain networks), and cognitive mechanisms 
(e.g., perception, attention, social interaction) are highly idiosyncratic and 
require dedicated explanations. This would lead to proliferation of theo- 
ries in fields like philosophy, psy chol ogy, neuroscience, ethology, biology, 
artificial intelligence, and robotics, with little hope for their unification. 
Another perspective is that, despite their diverse manifestations, the cen- 
tral aspects of be hav ior, cognition, and adaptation in living organisms are 
amenable to a coherent explanation from first princi ples. 
These two possibilities map to two dif fer ent research programs and, to 
some extent, dif fer ent attitudes toward science: “neats” versus “scruffies” 
(terms due to Roger Shank). Neats always seek unification beyond the (appar- 
ent) heterogeneity of brain and mind phenomena. This usually corresponds 
to designing top- down, normative1 models that start from first princi ples and 
try to derive as much as pos si ble about brains and minds. Scruffies instead 
embrace the heterogeneity by focusing on details that demand dedicated 
explanations. This usually corresponds to designing bottom-up models that 
start from data and use what ever works to explain complex phenomena, 
including dif fer ent explanations for dif fer ent phenomena. 
Is it pos si ble to explain heterogenous biological and cognitive pheno- 
mena from first princi ples, as the neats assume? Is a unified framework to 
understand brain and mind pos si ble? 
This book answers these questions affirmatively and advances Active 
Inference as a normative approach to understand brain and mind. Our 
treatment of Active Inference starts from first princi ples and unpacks their 
cognitive and biological implications.