As someone with aphantasia, I find articles like this a bit ridiculous.

The author thinks that imagining a bicycle floating across the sky is easy and normal, but to me, it sounds impossible.

None of my thoughts ever cause any physical sensation like an image or a sound, so it seems odd to equate it with memory, imagination, or thought.

Of course, I have all kinds of ways to remember and plan things, but none of them ever involve anything like an image. I would be extremely surprised to see a bicycle flying across the sky.

The idea of a memory as a flashback or image seems as incomprehensible to me as using it for imagining things.

It took me about 20 years to discover that anyone actually saw images in their head. I think I found out through reading Galton's 1890 study on mental imagery.

The concept of a video game or a movie in your head seems ridiculous to me, and it sounds impossible, but I can imagine it.

It definitely does not feel like I am missing out. I think I can remember things faster and more accurately than I could if I ever had to picture them.

It does not seem necessary to picture things to think of them; it sounds like it would be distracting and inefficient.

It is possible that for me, thinking is kind of like a spreadsheet, except there are no numbers or cells, and there isn't a two-dimensional plane.

If I change certain parameters, other parameters change, and there are logical sequences of steps, like a directed acyclic graph or something, although those all seem like very visual metaphors.

It seems that I might think of things by slightly clenching the right side of my body or leaning right. If I think of a wide-open space, I might straighten my body and look to the horizon, like I am ready to survey and explore, and if I think of a closed space, I might cower and clench slightly.

I might think of most tools by imagining the muscle movements needed to interact with them. For example, if I am thinking of a mug, I start feeling like I am planning out the muscle movements needed to reach out and grab it.

If I am thinking of going to buy coffee, I start thinking about my coat and wallet, and then where I am going to go.

Anyway, none of it ever seems to involve anything like an image. I could do this while pacing back and forth, staring at a blank sheet of paper, or watching a movie. It seems like an irrelevant detail.

