

The Image of the City is a 1960 book by American urban theorist Kevin Lynch. The book is the result of a five-year study of Boston, Jersey City and Los Angeles on how observers take in information of the city, and use it to make mental maps. Lynch's conclusion was that people formed mental maps of their surroundings consisting of five basic elements.

The Image of the 

1960Pages194 pp.ISBN0-262-62001-4

Imageability

Lynch argues that for any given city, a corresponding set of mental images exist in the minds of the people who experience that city. Contributing to those images are five qualities which Lynch identifies as Paths, Edges, Districts, Nodes, and Landmarks.

Paths

These are the streets, sidewalks, trails, canals, railroads, and other channels in which people travel

They arrange space and movement between space

Edges

Boundaries

They can be either Real or Perceived

These are walls, buildings, and shorelines, curbstone, streets, overpasses, etc.

Districts

Medium to large areas that are two-dimensional

An individual enters into and out of these areas

Have common identifying characteristics

Nodes

Large areas you can enter, serve as the foci of the city, neighborhood, district, etc.

Offers the person in them multiple perspectives of the other core elements

"...the most successful node seemed both to be unique in some way and at the same time to intensify some surrounding characteristic"[1]: 77 

Landmarks

Points of reference person cannot enter into

These are buildings, signs, stores, mountains, public art

At least one aspect of them is unique or memorable in the context they exist

Mobile Points (such as Sun) can be used as well

InfluenceEdit

The Image of the City has influenced the fields of environmental psychology and environmental behavior as well as a generation of researchers working within them. Researchers that include Amos Rapoport, Claire Cooper Marcus, Oscar Newman, William H. Whyte, Kenneth Craik and Donald Appleyard. [2]



RELATED ARTICLES

Kevin A. Lynch

American urban planner and author (1918–1984)

Mental mapping

A person's point of view perception of an idea

Imageability

Kevin Andrew Lynch (January 7, 1918 – April 25, 1984) was an American urban planner and author. He is known for his work on the perceptual form of urban environments and was an early proponent of mental mapping. His most influential books include The Image of the City (1960), a seminal work on the perceptual form of urban environments, and What Time is This Place? (1972), which theorizes how the physical environment captures and refigures temporal processes