1. Introduction 
Today, there is practically a unanimous agreement that the computations of the brain are 
achieved through network connectivity [1]. A variety of theories exist (e.g., [2, 3, 4]) but 
they all propose different ways of how network computations may take place; all these 
theories agree that the synaptic connectivity contains the bulk the knowledge learned by the 
brain. The existing theories also agree that central to mental operations are the voltages 
forming across neuron membranes which carry the relevant information and computation. 
Consequently, it is believed that, at any moment in time, the current contents of a mind are 
determined by the collective states of the neuron membranes i.e., by their momentary 
voltages [1, 2, 3, 4]. Thus, these two mechanisms, synaptic connections and voltages, have 
been relied on as the key explanatory tools for all our attempts to understand how a mind 
may emerge within the brain. This paradigm is generally known as connectionism [1]. 
However, connectionism did not yet produce a satisfactory explanation of how the mental 
emerges from the physical. A number of open problems remains. These include unrealistic 
connectivity patterns [5], inability to work with symbols [6], lack of feed-forward architecture 
in the brain [7], global workspace for consciousness [8], and others [9]. The list also 
includes the scaling problem, which will be described next. As a result, the explanatory gap 
between the mind and the brain remains wide open [10, 8, 11, 12]. This situation raises a 
question of whether the classical paradigm should be challenged, and an alternative should 
be proposed—a paradigm that can offer a fresh set of ideas on how to explain the mind 
within the brain. 
2. The scaling problem of intelligence 
The present argument starts with a notion that animal-level and a human-level intelligence 
can only be reached by networks able to scale their intelligence well and moreover, classical 
connectionist networks do not scale intelligence satisfactorily. Recent studies have elucidated 
3 
the scaling limitations of connectionist networks: Investigations of the best performing 
connectionist networks, known as deep learning systems, revealed that advances in their 
intelligence can be only achieved if accompanied with an excessive increase in resources. 
Across all studies, these demands have been found to grow with a power law [13, 14, 15]. 
To double the number of objects recognized or to reduce the error of classification by half, 
an equation of a form r = ia applies to describe the needed increase in the model size or the 
size of the training data set (r is the resources needed, i is intelligence and a is the 
exponent). The value of exponent a is always well above 1 (Figure 1A). This means that the 
demands on resources explode as the intelligence grows. One study estimated the exponent 
a to be ~9 for computer vision [14]; this implies that doubling the intelligence of the state- 
of-the-art deep learning networks for vision (e.g., doubling the numbers of objects 
recognized without sacrificing accuracy), requires some 29 = ~500-fold increase in 
resources. Another study implied an exponent of ~13 for language models (~8000-fold 
increase in resources for doubling the intelligence; Figure 1A) [15].