Wordless Imageless Though

Ernest Osborne’s short article on “Thought” in the Lone Hand for June provoked a two-hour long discussion among some of my friends. The main conclusions are here concentrated for you:

If wordless, imageless thought be a possibility, is it not a further argument for obeying the inhibitions of conscience without waiting until the inhibitory impulses can be put into words?

For instance, if one becomes conscious of an uneasy feeling when one is about to do a certain action, would it not be better to avoid doing the action even if one cannot put into words the reason why the action should be avoided?

There are unmistakable emotional impulses towards right action which occur periodically and which we should train ourselves to obey unhesitatingly.

There are unmistakable emotional impulses towards right action which occur periodically and which we should train ourselves to obey unhesitatingly.

No time should be spent in seeking a logical reason for the impulses. Obey them. You know they are right—right for you at any rate.

This knowledge at critical moments of what is right and wrong is an instance of thought unclothed with words.

Such knowledge springs from a level of the mind deeper than the layer on which operate thought-images, combined with the capability of verbal expression.

When the deeper levels of the mind operate harmoniously with the outermost layer (we took McDougall as our authority for speaking of mental “layers” and “levels”), then only is a man at peace with himself and the universe.

For him the paradox, "Right speech is right action", is no longer a paradox. The majority of us are unhappily crammed with Freudian complexes which make harmonious speech and action nearly impossible. Hence the saying, “He acted against his better self.”

Translated into modern psychological terms the phrase would read, “The layers of his mind were not acting in unity.” 

After the masses are sufficiently educated, a new terminolgy for mental operations will have to come into being.

Such psychically identical terms as “conscience,” “intelligence,” “will,” and “reason,” will fall as far into the limbo of 

disuse as such words as “humours” and “faculties” have already fallen.

The greatest lesson of modern psychology is that the mind is not a concatenation of separate powers, but one power using as its instrument the whole body.

— L. Woolacott, 1920

https://nla.gov.au/nla.obj-393171833/view?sectionId=nla.obj-432274350&partId=nla.obj-393300183#page/n4/mode/1up
