On Spinal Catastrophism and Mark Fisher’s Critique of Bataille

I just want to briefly include discourse about a concept and then a person which are both in some way related to Nick Land.

In Fanged Noumena, Nick Land speaks of ‘spinal catastrophism’. In fact, in the very back of the book, there is a labeled diagram of the spine in the context of spinal catastrophism. In the book Spinal Catastrophism: A Secret History, Moynihan argues that Bataille was seduced by spinal catastrophism referring to the two axes. But, for a human being to be continuous with either axis, the top of the spine necessarily must not be in alignment with the rest of the spine. If one is to be continuous with the vertical axis, they must be standing on two feet, their head must be all the way back, and their eyes looking to the sky. If one is to be continuous with the horizontal axis, they must be on all fours, and looking straight ahead. Even if this isn’t an adequate response to Moynihan’s critique, I argue that in those events of ecstasy which Bataille looks towards, the subject is not present at all and so neither is the spine.

Before we go over Mark Fisher’s critique of Bataille, can we go over the exchange between Fisher and Land which was about Nick Land’s response to the essay in the “comment section”?

￼

Image 11 — ‘Banter Between Friends’[188]

I laughed for a good few minutes over this exchange. Mark mocking Land for writing The Thirst for Annihilation is hilarious. Nick’s response is hilarious as well. I hope this just shows that even very complex theorists such as Land are still “human”.

So, Mark’s critique of Bataille is subpar. He argues that “[t]he connection between Bataille and fascism should by now be obvious: the same withdrawal from the secularized modernity into a blood cult, the same ‘alphabet of unreason’”.[189] I have responded to this critique before (see my responses to Wolin and Habermas’s critiques of Bataille above), but this time, I want to try something new. If we see fascism, as Land does, that is, as a libidinal and religious issue in that it is completely anti-religious. Though it does have a libidinal element to it, as Bataille notes… we are dealing with the psyche after all, no? In response to Mark, we should look towards Land. Land says, “[Bataille’s] early essays sketch a vision of fascism as the most fanatical project for the elimination of excess, an attempt at the secular enforcement of the perfectly ordered city of God against the disorder, luxuriance, and mess of surplus production, as its sprawls into the voluptuary expenditure of eroticism and art”.[190]

Solar Accelerationism: Land and Dibben on Capitalism

This is where we are to bridge from Land to Dibben: the question of accelerationism and capitalism (hereinafter referred to as ‘capital’).

Let’s first look at Dibben’s interpretation of Bataille’s understanding of the Marshall Plan and capital. Dibben’s interpretation of Bataille here comes off as overly “accelerationist”. Dibben holds that Bataille sees capitalism as a machine whose motor is its history; “For Bataille, the history of capital is the history of the overcoming of the restrictions placed on it by the values of utility”.[191] In fact, Bataille even says that capital is “a machine condemned to increase generally”.[192] Capital is a machine whose motor is accelerating towards its own dissolution. Thus, for Dibben, whenever Bataille speaks of not destroying the works of capitalism while one destroys capitalism, accelerationism is in no way precluded. Acceleration isn’t precluded because the Marshall Plan is acceleration because it is “an act which induces the haemorrhage of restricted economy into general economy, and reveals the explosive energetic truth of the virulence of capital, as an economy of the intensification of intensive quanta”.[193] Accelerating is the proliferation and intensification of “the proliferating virulent intensifications of liberated capital”.[194] This is what the Marshall Plan is. It is an accelerating sacrifice. Dibben sees that “[f]or Bataille, the Marshall Plan — were it to have occurred — would designate the intensive condition of capital and the general economy of energetic communications at every level of energetic matter”.[195] Then when we look at the fact that Bataille said much earlier in his life, “What decides social destiny today is the organic creation of a vast composition of forces, disciplined, fanatical, capable of exercising an implacable authority in the day to come. Such a composition of forces must group together all those who do not accept the course to the abyss — to ruin and to war — of a capitalist society without head and without eyes,” we realize that there was no “split” in Bataille’s work, no domestication after the war.[196] The accelerationism of Bataille early work of the 1930s which Benjamin Noys talks about in his book Malign Velocities: Accelerationism and Capitalism is never lost, just latent.

Now, you may say, “well Evan, wouldn’t this be a contradiction in Bataille’s thinking because Bataille tried to avert war?”. My answer would be “no.” There is no contradiction”. I say this because, for Bataille, the economic competition engendered by the Marshall Plan is a different form of war. War in capitalism is inevitable. War is a part of the acceleration process, economic or military. Now, onto (Land’s) Bataille and Land’s conception of capital.

As Land says, “For Bataille, on the contrary, ‘capital’ is not a cohesive or formalizable system, but the tyranny of the good (the more or less thorough rationalization of consumption in the interests of accumulation)”.[197] But “Capital is” also, for Bataille, “a headless lurch into the abyss, an acephalic catastrophe”.[198] Capital is thus, for Bataille, a machine which tries to control itself, tries to regulate the speed of the motor, but fails to do so and thus goes towards annihilation. Now, this is not to say we must support capital. NOT AT ALL. Capital itself is a MACHINE which is a GOOD machine, that is, a USEFUL machine. Reinforcing capital is reinforcing restricted economy, but left to its own devices, like all things, it will “obey” the laws of general economy, and tend towards zeros. Now, you may say “Evan… isn’t this completely against the picture of capital you have tried to paint in this book thus far? That is, with all of your very critical responses to the idea that Bataille was a capitalist as well as your exposition of semiocapitalism and capitalism’s erasure of the erotic?”. To this question I would have to respond with a “no”. Now, why do I say “no”? It is quite simple. Capital tries to hang on to its head. We can see this within the erasure of the erotic as well as its usage of what I called ‘systems of semiotic control’ to keep things flowing through the pipes in a nice and non-problematic way. But even then, I still said the pipes were going to burst. And the pipes burst because they are there. The pipes filling up is the acceleration process. There are no pipes at zero… This is to say, capital organizes itself as the highest edifice of restricted economy, though Bataille suggests that this may actually be the Marxist economy. When Bataille, in the first volume of The Accursed Share, suggests that “Marxism … denies even more than Calvinism a tendency of man to look for himself directly when he acts,” he means here not that Marxism denies action in the sense of subjectivity, but rather that Marxism denies the ability for action to not be useful.[199] Thus, Marxism upholds the Protestant work ethic even more than capital? It may seem so but, in fact, “Marxism is less the completion of the Calvinst project than a critique of capitalism,” because, for Bataille, Marxism is critiquing capital for not following the principle of utility enough, for “[liberating] things without rigor”.[200] In this sense, when Bataille says, “Capitalism in a sense is an unreserved surrender to things, heedless of consequences and seeing nothing beyond them” [emphasis mine], could we not say that ‘heedless’ is headless, thus capital is headless (like Land says), and that it is without eyes?[201] Could we not also say that this is why capital is actually a higher form (by higher, I mean more restricted (more useful, productive, good, etc.)) of restricted economy than Marxism? But back to the main issue at hand. When I spoke of the pipes, I meant that capital still tries to reinforce itself but again all restricted economies have their general blindspot. Thus, we do not endorse capital because one cannot endorse unconditional accelerationism (u/acc). This is just a description of a system, there is no moralizing prescription to be involved.

But we must address something very important: Weber. Many have critiqued Bataille (e.g., Goux) for not adjusting his understanding of capital to the current conditions of present day postmodern consumerist capital. Goux, for example, argues that the ‘Protestant work ethic’ no longer exists today. Now, Land has a surprisingly original and innovative answer to Goux’s critique of Bataille. Land says, “The notorious asceticism of accumulative Protestantism already prefigures the suicide of the last ruling class, anticipating the defintive surrender of all humanity to death … In its early stages capital is still a matter of self-control, but after a couple of centuries its rigid ethos withers away, because there is no effective self left to resist it” [emphasis mine].[202] So, what Land is saying actually goes back to Weber. In The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Weber says, “Man is dominated by the making of money, by acquisition as the ultimate purpose of his life. Economic acquisition is no longer subordinated to man as the means for the satisfaction of his material needs … The capitalist economy of the present day is an immense cosmos into which the individual is born, and which presents itself to him, at least, as an individual, as an unalterable order of things in which he must live. It forces the individual, in so far as he is involved in the system of market relationships, to conform to capitalistic rules of action”.[203] When Land argues that Weber agreed that the Protestant work ethic wouldn’t last forever, he says this because of the fact that, for Weber, the individual self is no longer in control of capital or their actions within the market; we are now in the passenger’s seat, capital has taken the driver’s seat, and it is driving towards zero. There is no longer an ethos, that is, an ethic, because an ethos, an ethic, is how individual human beings volitionally act to uphold values. The Protestant work ethic speaks of someone working hard and becoming self-made, but this is not seen at all within Weber’s view of capital which we have just gone over. For Weber, Bataille, and Land, human beings are constructed according to the rules of capital, that is, according to capital itself. Thus, we must recognize that “[o]nce the commodity system is established there is no longer a need for an autonomous cultural impetus into the order of the abstract object”.[204] We can therefore say that capital does two things. “Capital,” firstly, “attains its own ‘angular momentum’, perpetuating a run-away whirlwind of dissolution, whose hub is the virtual zero of impersonal metropolitan accumulation”.[205] “Capital,” secondly, “breaks us down and reconstructs us, with increasing frequency, as it pursues its energetic fluctuation towards annihilation”.[206] This is another argument for why we all tend towards zero, annihilation, death, and so on, and so on: capital constructs us according to itself, we therefore follow its movements, and its only movement is towards zero.

Solar Nihilism: On Ray Brassier’s Nihil Unbound

Ray Brassier, in his truly groundbreaking and awe inspiring book Nihil Unbound: Extinction and Enlightenment which I have always had a certain unexplainable and naturally rising affinity for, speaks of nihilism. Now, I must first say that a large majority of this book, as of the date I write this, goes over my head. Now, this is not to say I don’t understand what it is saying. Rather, I am saying that it doesn’t interest me. But, my affinity for this book which is something which just naturally spawns inside my brain starts at the end, that is, with the final chapter “The Truth of Extinction”. Thought and Non-Being are paired together within Brassier’s ‘transcendental nihilism’. This is why the atheological nihilism of Land and Bataille goes further: this nihil of atheology is the pairing of Non-Thought and Non-Being. Let us think back to Duane Rousselles’s After Post-Anarchism.

￼

Image 12 — ‘Figure 1.0 — Essence’[207]

Contemporary speculative realism answers “I think therefore I am” (Being — Thought (Knowing)). Correlationism is in the third quadrant (Being — Thought (Knowing)), but it hesitates in its answer. Transcendental nihilism answers “I think therefore I am not” (Non-Being — Thought). We are in the first quadrant. Atheological nihilism, that is, materialist nihilism answers “I am not thinking therefore I am not” (Nonknowing — Non-Being), but the part of the sentence which is “I am” is completely erased by zero. But, let’s look at this nihilism of Brassier and see its similarities to our nihilism.

Firstly, I must say that many have argued that Land in The Thirst for Annihilation is actually critiquing nihilism and is not a proponent of it. But this is not true. Land speaks of WESTERN nihilism as wretched, he says, “wretched Western nihilism”.[208] But western nihilism is not nihilism at all because it retains a theological understanding of negation. Land’s nihilism is atheological, and this is evident when he says, “It is obscurantism of the most tediously familiar kind to suggest that the ‘nothing’ of nihilism is an indissolubly theology concept. The nihil is not a concept at all, but rather immensity and fate”.[209] For Land, negation is atheological and it is a theological gesture to suggest that negation is theological (as Lyotard does in Libidinal Economy); Land says, “For Nietzsche it is facile to accuse atheism of having a recourse to a notion of negativity which is itself essentially theological, because to do so is to remain passively within a socio-historically realized theological space that continues to organize the meanings of all terms”.[210] For Land, “Negation is re-forged in the celebration of the death of God”.[211] Furthermore, we can see that nihilism is “the liquidation of theological irreligion,” Land says, “There is no God but (only) zero … and nihil is true religion”.[212] It seems that whenever Land says something disparaging about “nihilism” he is speaking about that nihilism which is occidental and theological which is not at all nihilism because “[n]ihilism is … the reversion of all work to waste”.[213]

So, now that we have established that Land is a “nihilist” (though, we must note that nihilism is like libidinal materialism: a disease which one gets non-volitionally), let us move on to comparing the atheological nihilism of Land to the transcendental nihilism of Brassier.

Brassier’s Nihil Unbound is like Land’s work on Bataille: brave and unsettling. Brassier looks at the conventionally termed “naive” claim that nihilism is when one holds “existence is worthless,” and argues that “this banal assertion harbours hidden depths”.[214] This is what makes his work such a brave and unsettling: trying to work with something which everyone considers to be a naive and an uneducated opinion.

Firstly, Brassier, contra Land, asserts that nihilism is not a disease, but at the same time, Brassier seems to imply that if it were, he wouldn’t be looking for a cure.[215]

Secondly, for Brassier, nihilism is not a correlationist philosophy. He says, “nihilism is not … a pathological exacerbation of subjectivism, which annuls the world and reduces reality to a correlate of the absolute ego”.[216] In fact, nihilism is a speculative realist philosophy because it holds true “the unavoidable corollary of the realist conviction that there is a mind-independent reality, which, despite the presumptions of human narcissism, is indifferent to our existence and oblivious to the ‘values’ and ‘meanings’ which we would drape over it in order to make it more hospitable”.[217] For Brassier, “Nature is not our or anyone’s ‘home’, nor a particularly beneficent progenitor”.[218] This seems to meet Land’s call for a “[t]horoughgoing dehumanization of nature”.[219] Brassier’s rejection of an anthropocentric view of existence perfectly complements Land’s anti-humanist nihilism. But the similarities do not stop there.

There is, within Braisser’s understanding of nihilism, a soft hint of a tendency towards zero, and this clearly found when Brassier says, “nihilism is perceived as debilitating precisely insofar as it threatens to collapse those distinctions and categories through which we make sense of existence; not only the difference between meaning and meaninglessness, but also (and perhaps more menacingly) the difference between life and death”.[220] And all collapses into zero? Ultimately, Brassier’s explicit words on nihilism aren’t of much importance because it is rather his words on death that hold more importance with our current goal of a comparison between him and Land. And it isn’t just death but the death-drive.

For Brassier, “the fundamental tendency of the ‘drive’ or ‘instinct’ is the primordial pull back towards the inorganic,” he says, “Although life diverges from the inorganic in ever more circuitous detours, these are no more than temporary extensions of the latter, which will eventually contract back to their original inorganic condition, understood as the zero-degree of contraction, or decontraction”.[221] Does Brassier therefore agree that on a cosmological level everything tends towards zero? Well, before we answer that question let’s observe something remarkable. Brassier seems to inadvertently make the same argument as Land about drive and its relation to telos. Brassier says, “But if death constitutes the ‘aim of all life’, an aim which, according to Freud, is in some sense ‘internal’ to living organisms, this cannot simply be understood in Aristotelian terms as a telos”.[222] Brassier correctly sees that the inorganic cannot be the telos of the organic if it is the cause of the organic. Brassier, jumping off this point, says, “Just as the reality of the inorganic is not merely a function of the existence of the organic, tso the reality of death is not merely a function of life’s past, or of its future”.[223] In fact, death, for Brassier, is that which drives all things, he says, in a truly libidinal materialist fashion, “Death, understood as the principle of decotratiction driving the contractions of organic life is not a past or future state towards which life tends, but rather the originary purposelessness which compels all purposefulness, whether organic or psychological”.[224] Now, the tendency towards zero is again not a tendency towards a past or future state, just like death is not that either for Braisser. Zero is always there pushing libidinal matter forward (this is the process of mutation (permutation)). The veil of Maya over zero is what makes us think that there is one.

Conclusion to Shamanic Bataille: Libidinal Energetics and Nick Land’s Critique of Kant

￼

Evan Jack



83 min read

·

Sep 21, 2021

