I think maybe I was punished once at about and told to sit in a chair for five minutes. I think I asked myself has it been five minutes yet about a hundred and fifty thousand times. It seemed like I sat there for all of eternity, and maybe I opened some kind of wormhole in my mind because to my recollection that was the last time I ever got in trouble and the last time I was I got in trouble or needed to be punished. I mean to sit there contemplating the nature of time while gazing into the nothingness of the void (all I could see was the rest of the living room) for all of eternity was quite a task, it was definitely some kind of psychological torment I mean I could easily gotten out of the chair and walked across the room but it didn't even occur to me until 30 something years later. It was like a prison with no doors, and my mother was still doing something in the kitchen just out view, I definitely did not feel like I was being psychologically tormented or that there was anything unjust about it. I really think that it was normal and that somehow my perception of time was being stretched, this must because didn't ever have any voices or images in my head, I really still had never heard of daydreaming yet, and I had heard about imagination about a year earlier, but I knew for certain I didn't have one of those, and it wasn't till a lifetime later (at like ten) that I could fake having an imagination by making up stories by plagiarizing stories I had heard but changing some of the details, so they would seem original. I don't think it is even possible to explain in less than 10,000 words or not, but somehow my first five years of "school" I had no teachers it was literally supervised learning and I was trained exactly like gpt, being given text to read and then texts with missing blanks to fill in. Having no imagination I used to go and run to my mother if I wanted to use a paper and pencil and say mama, what should I draw and she would tell me something and I would go back and draw it. But then one day she said I don't know go look in the flier or a book, and I then had a strategy I could use from then on, and I could draw anytime I wanted, by just looking for a picture in a book. At some point I saw some kid drawings something without looking at it like a stick person or a house, and I thought how on earth are they doing that? It was 16 before by I realized I could fake that by looking at a drawing of a stickman and then copying it. It was probably still a few years before I realized there was some kind of graph calculus involved and so I developed systems for accomplishing this, which just seemed to make the feat even more impressive, I am starting to think it was another ten years before it even occured to me that it might be a possibility that some people might be able to see things in their head and that this might be a regular occurrence. I read this in like 2000 in Galton's 1890 but I sort of dismissed it as bad experimental methodology, as it was like the first questionnaire.

Around 2010 I started to realize that like three quarters to like 90 percent of people see things in their head on a regular basis, and that they equate this with thought. 