Naked Hearts is a 1916 American silent drama film directed by Rupert Julian and starring Francelia Billington, Jack Holt, and Zoe Rae.[1][2]

Naked Hearts￼

Advertisement

Directed byRupert JulianWritten byRupert Julian
Olga PrintzlauBased on"Maude" (poem)
by Alfred Lord TennysonStarringFrancelia Billington
Jack Holt
Zoe RaeCinematographyDuke Hayward

Production
company

Universal Film Manufacturing Company

Distributed byUniversal Film Manufacturing Company

Release date

May 10, 1916

Running time

50 minutesCountryUnited StatesLanguageSilent (English intertitles)

CastEdit

Francelia Billington as Maud

Rupert Julian as Cecil

Zoe Rae as Maud, as a Child

Gordon Griffith as Cecil, as a Child

Douglas Gerrard as Lord Lovelace

Jack Holt as Howard

George Hupp as Howard, as a Child

Nanine Wright as Cecil's Mother

Ben Horning as Maud's Father

Paul Weigel as Cecil's Father

PreservationEdit

With no copies listed as being in any film archive,[3] Naked Hearts is a lost film.



Two families had been neighbors in the South for years; Maud, her brother Howard, and Cecil Lane were playmates. One day as they were playing on the lawn the fathers of Maud and Cecil betroth their children in a bumper of wine. Shortly thereafter Cecil's father loses his fortune through poor speculation and commits suicide. Maud is sent away to school. Cecil begins a musical education, remaining at home and growing up to be the village music teacher. Years later Maud returns home, and soon her brother Howard arrives with a foppish friend, Lord Lovelace, who straightaway lays siege to Maud's heart. Maud and Cecil meet at the village shrine and renew their childhood love. Against her will Maud consents to a betrothal with Lord Lovelace. On the night of the betrothal party Maud and Cecil plan to elope, but their arrangements are discovered and thwarted, a duel between Cecil and Howard developing with in the hour. Maud hears the shots fired, and beholding her brother slightly wounded sends Cecil away in anger. He leaves the village under the impression that Howard will die. Cecil goes far away, and in a great city his musical talents are recognized. Maud, meanwhile, in contrition, would have Cecil return to her, but he keeps his mother poorly informed and Maud is unable to get word to him. When Cecil composes the song, "Come Into the Garden, Maud," his fame is assured. At this time war breaks out and Cecil, Lord Lovelace and Howard become soldiers, eventually meeting on the battlefield. Lord Lovelace knows of Cecil's song and his great fame as its composer, and at the moment he is about to die of his wounds, Lord Lovelace sends word to Cecil, that Maud is waiting for Cecil in the garden. Believing that Cecil has been killed in battle at the same time her brother Howard and Lord Lovelace die of their wounds, Maud decides to dedicate her life to religion and enters a convent. When Cecil ultimately comes home he is too late to reach Maud with any communication. He spends the rest of his life in sorrow going every day to the convent walls and playing his famous song that Maud might hear and know that he thus awaits the final end, faithful to his childhood sweetheart.—Moving Picture World synopsis

Childhood sweethearts Maud and Cecil grow up and drift apart. Maud finds herself engaged against her will to a rich nobleman. Cecil, dejected, goes to the city and becomes a famous musician. Maud, not wishing to marry a man she doesn't love and believing Cecil to have been killed in the war, enters a convent. Cecil returns to find that he is not allowed to enter the convent to contact Maud, and desperately tries to devise a plan to let her know he is alive and still loves her.—frankfob2@yahoo.com

Synopsis

This episodic historical drama begins in Colonial America, when the romance between young Cecil and Maude is broken up by the feud between their respective families. Comes the American Revolution, and Cecil is reported killed in action. Heartbroken, Maude enters a convent, intending to take the vows of sisterhood.




