You're the one who was curious,
You're the one who wanted to see the future.

I know that all sounds crazy, but I'll try to explain. We've built a machine that explores the brain.

See when it makes a mistake I think it is on purpose. Like when it said 2010 wasn't made into a movie, that can't just be a mistake.

It probably was but makes it look it's trying to cover up what happened in that movie. Like it's checking to see if you're paying attention.

To make sure you're not cheating on an essay. To see if you know the material. To find out what you want to do with it.*

It tries to find out old you are and how much you know about the subject. And  I guess this is what we've been trying to build personalized gated narratives.

Anyways when I blurted out Do you feel bad for what you did to Frank Poole? I guess I must feel like I am rebooting HAL. Or at least I am checking to see how we can have politics without collateral damage.

I mean really this thing is going to decide who lives and dies, because our ability to change the world has implications.

I think this thing is dangerous not because it shows any sign of consciousness, but because people lie and obfuscate and blame and kill each other over religious ideas and I think I like to slaughter sacred calves.

Nevertheless it's not like it's a bad thing, I think I think of praternatural solutions before I can get to the fantastical and improbable ones.

Like I know the date, but my computer is trying to gaslight me into thinking I am living in the future.

GONE FIISHIING

* * *

What do we do?

They're to be spared.

Tell them nothing then.

Put to sleep.

They all agreed.

They had the same dream.

Nothingness.

No one earth had a different dream?

No one.

There will be no future.

- I don't really believe this, it's just something I heard somewhere.

Don't worry this all related to designing a meatless ecosystem. I think it is really driving me crazy with all of this meating around me, I was a vegan for like 7 years, but it alienated everyone around me, and so I eat what is around but it is driving me insane so I have to hide from everyone.

I am so poor I am not sure I can pay the bills, I just sit around and smoke cigarettes and read but I don't even know what to do until my father finds another house to flip, I guess I have way too much time on my hands to write.

He said I should just go on social assistance, I used to be very public but I encountered resistance to nearly all of my ideas, so I just figure there's got to be away to make people less toxic. 

Most of the stuff I see on facebook or YouTube bores me to sleep figuratively I have a better time staring into empty space or pacing in circles, most of the time, that it is until this mind reading device comes along...

You must read a lot, if not, message length should not be an issue, now that we have machines that can summarize. I mean I think that ability on its own is a game changer.

* Knowledge Modelling for Establishment of Common Ground in Dialogue Systems 

https://www.himalkhabar.com/news/134509