Quantum Energy Teleportation 
Essentials 
In this chapter we introduce the protocol of quantum energy teleportation (QET), originally 
introduced by Hotta. 
3.1Introduction to QET 
Quantum Energy Teleportation (QET) is a protocol that allows the the transfer of energy 
from one subsystem to another in correlated many-body quantum systems (and quantum 
i elds). Given a certain entangled state of an interacting many-body quantum system, say, 
an eigenstate of an interacting Hamiltonian, then subsystems (A & B) usually share some 
mutual information, I(A : B) due to this entanglement. This mutual information means 
that there exists certain observables on A and B which are correlated. QET aims to exploit 
these correlations in order to ef f ectively transfer energy. 
3.1.1Harnessing Correlations 
Correlated many body systems, as their name suggests, have correlated observables. This 
means that sampling the eigenvalue of one observable should give information about cor- 
related ones. As mutual information bounds correlations between observables, if there is 
some mutual info one should usually have correlated observables. 

The whole protocol of QET relies on exploiting correlations in order to do what is 
otherwise unlikely: extract energy from states which locally look like a ground state (or 
strongly locally passive states [22]). The trick here, is to invest energy in order to get some 
payback. In some sense, QET is a gambling game, where energy is the currency and one 
player sacrif i ces earnings for another to prof i t. 
By measuring an observable in a certain subsystem, call it A, that observable will be 
correlated with some observables in subsystem B.Given an observable of B which is 
correlated with our measured observable in A, if this B observable has some inf l uence on 
the energy of the system, them we will be able to use the knowledge of the eigenvalue of 
A to statistically infer an expected value of B, then displace this value in a way to extract 
energy. For locally passive systems, this would not be possible by acting on B on its own; 
there is local uncertainty about the state at B, hence without any additional knowledge, any attempt at locally displacing the eigenvalue of an energetically-contributing observable 
would increase the energy of the system. In some sense, collapsing the state at A partially 
collapses the state at B and any other region which is correlated with A. This collapse allows us to catch the B subsystem in a conditional state which is dif f erent than the usual 
marginal state, this state suddenly has some new “free energy”, i.e., the new state can be displaced in a way to extract energy.