1.4Animals Play, Animals Learn, Animals Dance, Ani- 
mals Talk. 
Play is, as we all have chance to observe, is the main ergo-interesting activity 
of human babies, kittens and puppies but students of animal behavior may say 
[7] that ”like other beautiful things play is ephemeral“ and that: 
Play is correlated with the development of the neocortex in mammals. (also 
of cerebellum?and of pallium in birds?).Many (most?)species of young 
mammals are known to play as well as some (many?)species of birds (e.g. 
crows and ravens) and, possibly, some turtles. (There are claims that ants were 
observed to play.) 
Playfulness retained into adulthood, e.g. in humans and dogs, goes along 
with other neonatal characteristics. Some adults animals in the wild also paly, 
e.g. dholes – red Asian dogs http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ejnuprap−RY. 
Dholes are smaller than wolves, around 15kg of weight and quite agile, e.g. 
jumping more than 2m high. They are more social than wolves and, unlike 
wolves, have little of a dominance hierarchy.Preparing for a hunt, they go 
through elaborate rituals of nuzzling, body rubbing and homo and heterosexual 
mounting. Though fearful of humans, dhole packs are bold enough to attack 
large and dangerous animals such as wild boar, water buf f alo, and even tigers. 
Travelling through thick brush, dholes coordinate their movements by whistles 
the mechanism of which remains unknown. Unlike most social canids, dholes 
let their pups eat i rst at a kill. (Wikipedia) 
Native people killed dholes by poisoning, snaring, shooting and clubbing 
pups at den sites to protect livestock while European sport hunters killed for 
fun. Read this: 
”... no ef f ort, fair or foul, should be spared to destroy these pests of the 
jungle...” that have ”not a single redeeming feature”. 
This is about dholes, not about sport hunters, and written as recently as 
1949 by somebody who called himself ”clean-footed naturalist”. 
http://www.cuon.net/dholes/danger.htm. 
(Rudyard Kipling depicts the ancestral program running the minds of such 
”naturalists” in The Jungle Book: ”... he [Mowgli] had seen the fearless dholes 
sleeping and playing and scratching themselves in the little hollows and tussocks 
that they use for lairs. He despised and hated them because they did not smell 
like the Free People, because they did not live in caves, and, above all, because 
they had hair between their toes while he and his friends were clean-footed.”) 
It is estimated that only 2500 dholes remain in the wild. 
