How the Theory Generalizes Active Learning (e.g., Fedorov, 1972). To optimize a function may require expensive data evaluations. Original active learning is limited to supervised classification tasks, asking which data points to evaluate next to maximize information gain, typically (but not necessarily) using 1 step look-ahead, assuming all data point evaluations are equally costly. The objective (to improve classification error) is given externally; there is no explicit intrinsic reward in the sense discussed here. The more general framework of creativity theory also takes formally into account: (1) Reinforcement learning agents embedded in an environment where there may be arbitrary delays between experimental actions and corresponding information gains, e.g., papers of 1991 & 1995, (2) The highly environment- dependent costs of obtaining or creating not just individual data points but data sequences of a priori unknown size, (3) Arbitrary algorithmic or statistical dependencies in sequences of actions & sensory inputs, e.g., papers of 2002 & 2006, (4) The computational cost of learning new skills, e.g., the 2002 paper here. Unlike previous approaches, these systems measure and maximize algorithmic novelty (learnable but previously unknown compressibility or predictability) of self-made, general, spatio- temporal patterns in the history of data and actions, e.g., papers 2006-2010.

No Objective Ideal Ratio Between Expected and Unexpected. Some of the previous attempts at explaining aesthetic experience in the context of math and information theory (Birkhoff 1933, Moles 1968, Bense 1969, Frank 1964, Nake 1974, Franke 1979) focused on the idea of an "ideal" ratio between expected and unexpected information conveyed by some aesthetic object (its order vs its complexity). Note that the alternative approach of JS does not have to postulate an objective ideal ratio of this kind. Instead his dynamic measure of interestingness reflects the change in the number of bits required to encode an object, and explicitly takes into account the subjective observer's prior knowledge as well as its limited compression improvement algorithm. Hence the value of an aesthetic experience is not defined by the observed object per se, but by the algorithmic compression progress of the subjective, learning observer.

Summary. To build a creative system we need just a few crucial ingredients: (1) A predictor or compressor (e.g., an RNN) of the continually growing history of actions and sensory inputs, reflecting what's currently known about how the world works, (2) A learning algorithm that continually improves the predictor or compressor (detecting novel spatio-temporal patterns that subsequently become known patterns), (3) Intrinsic rewards measuring the predictor's or compressor's improvements (= first derivatives of compressibility) due to the learning algorithm, (4) A separate reward optimizer or reinforcement learner (could be an evolutionary algorithm), which translates those rewards into action sequences or behaviors expected to optimize future reward - the creative agent is intrinsically motivated to make additional novel patterns predictable or compressible in hitherto unknown ways, thus maximizing learning progress of the predictor / compressor.

Alternative Summary. Apart from external reward, how much fun can a subjective observer extract from some sequence of actions and observations? His intrinsic fun is the difference between how many resources (bits & time) he needs to encode the data before and after learning. A separate reinforcement learner maximizes expected fun by finding or creating data that is better compressible in some yet unknown but learnable way, such as jokes, songs, paintings, or scientific observations obeying novel, unpublished laws.

PowerPlay: training an increasingly general problem solver by continually searching for the simplest still unsolvable problem

Copyright notice (2010): Text and graphics and Fibonacci web design by Jürgen Schmidhuber, Member of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts, 2010. JS will be delighted if you use parts of the data and graphics in this web page for educational and non-commercial purposes, including articles for Wikipedia and similar sites, provided you mention the source and provide a link.

https://people.idsia.ch/~juergen/creativity.html
