Bruno wrote a satirical poem called "The Ark of Noah" in 1570, which is now nowhere to be found. We are only acquainted with it through a later dialogue. In it, we find "the donkey quarrels for precedence among the animals, which to lose is great danger," referring to the Pope and the worldly powers. 

[16]

2 m

evaluate(input("Instruction: "))

Instruction: Translate: In monasterio, Bruno scripsit fabulam quam vocavit « De Arcâ Noë » in qua asini, qui monachos representabant, ingemuerunt de suo loco in arcâ assignato. Asini, qui pro laboris et dedicationis fama noti erant, invenerunt se in arcâ inferiores assignatos, dum animalia magis magnifica ut leones et elephantes in superioribus locis luxuriabantur. Asini protestaverunt et de aequitate huius dispositionis quaesiverunt, sed praefectus arcae, vulpes callida et charismatica, eos persuasit hoc esse ordinem naturalem rerum et laboris eorum necessarium esse ad salutem omnium animalium in arcâ. Progrediente viâ, vulpes et consilium eius porcorum potestatem et privilegia sibi acquisiverunt, dum asini onera magna sustinebant. Vulpes decisiones fecerunt quae sibi solis proderant, at asini intellexerunt se abuti. Asini statuerunt se coniungere et vulpes evertere, sed vulpes, callidae et coniunctae, rebellionem sedaverunt et potestatem retinuerunt. Asini frustrati et defessi remanserunt, sed sciuerunt se pro iustitia et aequalitate certare non posse desistere. Fabulam Bruno potentem commentationem de dinamicis potentiae et oppressionis fecit et de momento resistendi iniustitiae, quantumlibet difficile sit. Fabula largiter lecta et discussa est inter monachos et magnam in eorum comprehensionem mundi et loci eorum in eo habuit. Etiam, Bruno habuit idea de vita in aliis mundis et ea in suis scriptis exploravit. Hic fuit inter primos qui de tali re cogitavit et multa scripsit. Response: In the monastery, Bruno wrote a story called "De Arcâ Noë" in which the monks represented the asini, who were well-known for their hard work and dedication. The asini, who were known for their labor and dedication, were assigned to the lower levels of the arca, while the more magnificent animals such as lions and elephants were assigned to the higher levels. The asini protested this arrangement, claiming that it was not fair, but the fox, a wise and charismatic creature, persuaded them that this was the natural order of things and that it was necessary for the well-being of all the animals in the arca. The journey continued, and the fox gained the power and privileges of the pigs, while the asini continued to carry the heavy burdens. The fox made decisions that benefited only themselves, while the asini understood that they could not give up the fight for justice and equality. The asini decided to unite with the fox, but the fox refused, and the asini understood that they could not give up the fight for justice and equality. The asini were frustrated and defended themselves, but the fox rebelled and kept the power. The asini were defeated, but they realized that they could not give up the fight for justice and equality. Bruno wrote a powerful commentary on the dynamics of power and oppression and the difficulty of resisting injustice. He also explored the idea of life in other worlds and wrote extensively on the subject in his writings. He was one of the first to think about such things and wrote much on the subject.

