Multimodal Techniques for Detecting Alien Life using Assembly Theory and Spectroscopy 
Michael Jirasek†1, Abhishek Sharma†1, Jessica R. Bame†1, Nicola Bell1, Stuart M. Marshall,1 Cole 
Mathis1, Alasdair Macleod,1 Geoffrey J. T. Cooper!, Marcel Swart2,3, Rosa Mollfulleda2, Leroy Cronin*1 
†Equal contribution; Corresponding author *Lee.Cronin@glasgow.ac.uk 
1 School of Chemistry, The University of Glasgow, University Avenue, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK. 
2 University of Girona,Campus Montilivi (Ciencies), c/M.A. Capmany 69, 17003 Girona Spain 
3ICREA, Pg. Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain 
Detecting alien life is a difficult task because it's hard to find signs of life that could apply to any 
life form. However, complex molecules could be a promising indicator of life and evolution. 
Currently, it's not possible to experimentally determine how complex a molecule is and how that 
correlates with information-theoretic approaches that estimate molecular complexity. Assembly 
Theory has been developed to quantify the complexity of a molecule by finding the shortest path 
to construct the molecule from simple parts, revealing its molecular assembly index (MA). In this 
study, we present an approach to rapidly and exhaustively calculate molecular assembly and 
explore the MA of over 10,000 molecules. We demonstrate that molecular complexity (MA) can be 
experimentally measured using three independent techniques: nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR), tandem mass spectrometry (MS), and infrared spectroscopy (IR), and these give consistent 
results with good correlations. By identifying and counting the number of absorbances in IR 
spectra, carbon resonances in NMR, or molecular fragments in tandem MS, the molecular 
assembly index of an unknown molecule can be reliably estimated from experimental data. This 
represents the first experimentally quantifiable approach to defining molecular assembly, a 
reliable metric for complexity, as an intrinsic property of all molecules and can also be performed 
on complex mixtures. This paves the way to use spectroscopic techniques to unambiguously detect 
alien life in the solar system, and beyond on exoplanets. 
2 
The exploration of chemical space reveals the striking fact that most molecules greater than molecular 
weight of 300 Da, which are not simple oligomers, are all connected to the existence of life on earth.1 
This is because complex molecules such as natural products2 are too complex to form by chance in any 
detectable abundance, and therefore can only be made by the complex biochemical pathways found in 
biological cells. Currently, the exploration of complex chemical space is done in-silico3,4 and this 
focusses on chemical structure,5 topological features,6 application-specific physicochemical descriptors 
and graph theory and tends to explore medicinal chemical space for drug discovery and development.7 
In this regard pharmaceuticals can also be considered to be biosignatures, or more specifically 
technosignatures, since many are complex and would not have been made without humans using 
technology.8–10 In addition to target selectivity, synthetic accessibility is important to explore the 
complexity of the molecule.11 There are many competing notions of chemical complexity12, which have 
led to different algorithmic methodologies being developed using metrics based on molecular weight, 
counting chiral centres or primarily focusing on substructure properties etc.13–15 However, with the recent 
development in automated chemical synthesis,16 a proxy for complexity is required that is fast to estimate 
molecular complexity directly from the acquired experimental data, instead of performing complete 
structure elucidation. Additionally, for biosignature detection,17 it is important that the complexity metric 
can be estimated directly from the experimental data without any assumptions about the local