So in the Sec. 2 we will introduce void-dominated cosmic l uid 
and by the drops-bubbles mixed l uid model show that in such a 
l uid we will have an ef f ective negative pressure at large scale. In the 
Sec. 3 and 4, by a dimensional calculating of the surface tension, 
we will obtain a possible estimation for the values of cosmological 
constants for two groups of cosmic objects 푖.푒. superclusters and 
galaxies. Some results, predictions and discussions on the model 
will be presented in i nal section. 
Figure 1. The cosmic web is mostly occupied by supervoids: The 
wight and red areas are superclusters and i laments of galaxies, blue 
areas are voids and wight dots are single galaxies inside the cos- 
mic voids (https://sci.esa.int/web/planck/-/51104-numerical-simulation-of- 
the-cosmic-web; with permission). 
Figure 2. Schematic of void-dominated cosmic l uid that occupied by super- 
voids: Negative pressure with ef f ective force of supervoids on galaxies in the 
walls (black circle) acts as the positive pressure with ef f ective attractive force 
on local scale (yellow circle) . 
2 PRESSURE AND SURFACE TENSION OF COSMIC 
VOIDS 
Let’sconsider the current cosmic web in Fig. 1 containing a network 
of the voids, in which several clusters and i laments, small and vast 
voids are merging to each other (see the area bounded to the black 
rectangularinFig.2).Whatiscertainisthattheuniverseisinthevoid- 
dominated state in the large scale overview. The continuous merging 
of voids causes the bubbles to grow larger, and this increasing in 
the bubble radius results in an extra ef f ective repulsive force on 
the particles(i.e., galaxies) on the surface of the bubbles (i.e., voids). 
Undersuchconditions,cosmicf l uidisclusteredlikemergingbubbles 
and is situated in the void-dominated phase. 
In the model proposed in this paper, we imagine galaxies and their 
clusters as ’drops’ and under dense spaces (voids) between them 
as ’bubbles’ Yusof i & Mohsenzadeh (2010). In a mixture of water 
drops and bubbles, bubbles on their surface move the i ne drops 
away from their center to make themselves larger, while large drops 
MNRAS 000, 1–?? (2021) 
Dark Energy in Void-dominated Cosmology3 
attract i ne drops to their center to grow larger. If the void wall forms 
a set of galaxy clusters and superclusters, we will have a bubble 
whose dif f erence in internal and external pressure comes from the 
Young-Laplace formula (Butt et al. 2003; Reichl 2016) 
Δ푃 = 
2훾 
¯ 푟 
.(1) 
Here, 훾 represents the surface tension for drop (bubble) with average 
radius ¯ 푟. The clusters of galaxies behave like drops, so their pressure 
on the test particles/galaxies is positive with an attractive gravity 
ef f ect (yellow circle in Fig. 2). These galaxies experience attractive 
force in the clusters-dominated areas at local scales, but at large 
scale that we have void-dominated areas, the situation is completely 
dif f erent. Galaxies that mostly accumulate on the surface of voids, 
would experience ef f ective negative pressure, because of thefact that 
voids inclosed by superclusters are expanding, and hence pushing 
the galaxies away from each other. Therefore, inspired by (1), two 
factorsareef f ectiveinthepressureofvoidsoncosmicscales.Thef i rst 
factor is the surface tension 훾, due to the attraction between material 
particlesthatmakeupthedisk-shaped objectsonthesurfaceofvoids, 
andthesecondfactorisduetothecurvature(1 
¯ 푟)ofthesecosmicvoids