
"Reed Wall Mind" is a theory that suggests that the story of Noah's Ark is a metaphor for how the mind is able to process and organize different types of information. In this interpretation, the Ark can be seen as a model of the mind, with different compartments or sections used to divide and organize different types of animals, much like how the mind separates and organizes different types of information.

In this theory, the Reed Wall can be seen as a metaphor for the way that information "leaks" or filters into the mind through our senses. Just as a reed wall can allow sound to pass through while still maintaining some level of privacy and separation, the mind is able to process and filter information while still maintaining some level of organization and structure.

The idea that Noah can hear the different animals braying and bellowing, suggests that the mind is able to process and understand different types of information, even if it is chaotic or disorganized. Where different subunits of knowledge are isolated but can leak out or filter up to a multiscale decision maker. 


It's worth noting that this is a speculative theory, and it is not an established or widely accepted one. However, it can be used as an interesting approach to understand the significance of the Ark story and its possible meanings and how it can relate to the mind.

Ok I didn't even finish my sentence but that was going to say, so that Noah can bring them food, help with medical issues, and maybe don't put the animals that fight next to each other. Also it sees Noah as a treasure hunter or collector, finding all the interesting animals just as a librarian might collect interesting books and an AI scientists might collect models and model-free methods that work or have interesting, novel, or salient features.

Yes, that is an interesting interpretation of the story of Noah and the Ark. In this theory, Noah is seen as a kind of "treasure hunter" or "collector" of interesting animals, much like a librarian might collect interesting books or an AI scientist might collect models and model-free methods that work or have interesting, novel, or salient features.

The idea that Noah is able to provide food and medical care to the animals, and to separate those that might fight, suggests that he is able to understand and organize the different needs and characteristics of the different animals. This can be seen as a metaphor for the way the mind is able to process and organize different types of information, and to make decisions based on that information.
