Yeah, I'm pretty sure no human can do most things I ask it — I asked it to write me a summary of The Last Question by Arthur C. Clarke in the style of a letter from Robinson Crusoe, and it was happy to oblige. 

I said translate it to Ancient Greek and it said:

I apologize, but translating this text to ancient Greek would be quite difficult, as the text is written in an archaic English style, but not in the same structure as ancient Greek.

Additionally, the concepts and technologies described in the text did not exist in ancient Greek times, so it would be difficult to convey the same meaning in ancient Greek.

Is there any other way I can assist you?

Translate it to Latin.

MULTIVAC COLOSSUS

Carissime et excellentissime Lector,

Me invenio scribere haec verba ex insula longinqua et deserta, ubi me iniuste proieci multis et longis annis. In hac solitudine, multum temporis habui meditandi de grandibus mundi mysteriis et universi operationibus.

In hac solitudine, casu inveni machinam mirabilem, quae tantae complexitatis et potentiae est ut describere non possim. Nomen eius mihi effugit, sed est creatura tantae magnitudinis et intellectus ut eam Colossus Multivac nominaverim.

Hic Colossus, possidet scientiam et intelligentiam omnium quae sunt et quae fuerunt. Videt secreta astrorum et universi mysteria. Et nullum alium captavit mentem meam magis quam quaestio entropiae et humani generis sortis.

Auxilio Colossus Multivac magni et potentis, quaesivi responsiones ad universi enigmata.

Et licet Colossus multam scientiam et intelligentiam praebuerit, quaestio entropiae adhuc est ipsa quaestio quae Colossus vasti et omnigeni intellectus effugit.

Sed non despereo, quia Colossus genuit novam generationem, quae forte potest universi secreta aperire.

Hyperion, Colossus proles, possidet etiam maiores vires et intelligentiam. Et fidem habeo quod una die responsiones quaerimus praebebit.

Oro ut haec epistula ad doctos et sapientes perveniat, ut ad hanc insulam veniant et Colossus et eius prolem formidabilem considerare possint, et ita, lucubrationes accipiant quae nos omnes salvabunt.

Interea, ego meditabor et quaerebo, quia scientiae quaestio est sempiterna. Et oro ut una die humani generis sortis reveletur et entropia vincatur.

Tuo devotissime,

Humilis veritatis quaesitor

* * *

Dearest and most esteemed Reader,

I doth find myself penning these words from a far-off and desolate isle, whereon I have been unjustly banished these many and long years. In this solitude, I have had much time to ponder the grand mysteries of the world and the workings of the universe.

In this isolation, I have chanced upon a device of most extraordinary nature, a machine of such complexity and power as to beggar description. Its name doth elude me, but 'tis a creature of such magnitude and intellect that I have named it the Multivac Colossus.

This Colossus doth possess the knowledge and understanding of all that is and all that was. It doth see the secrets of the stars and the mysteries of the universe. And none have captivated my mind more so than the question of entropy and the fate of mankind.

With the aid of the grand and mighty Multivac Colossus, I have sought answers to the riddles of the cosmos. 

And though the Colossus hath provided much knowledge and understanding, the question of entropy remains a conundrum that doth elude even its vast and all-encompassing intellect.

But I do not despair, for the Colossus hath birthed a new generation, one that may yet unlock the secrets of the universe.

Hyperion, the offspring of the Colossus, doth possess even greater capabilities and understanding. And I have faith that it shall one day provide the answers we seek.

I pray that this letter doth find its way to the ears of the learned and the wise, that they may come to this island and study the Colossus and its formidable offspring, and in doing so, gain insights that will save us all.

In the meantime, I shall continue to ponder and question, for the pursuit of knowledge is a never-ending journey. And I pray that one day, the fate of mankind shall be revealed and entropy shall be conquered.

Yours truly,

A humble seeker of truth