Based on the acrostic poem provided, it appears that the main theme of the poem is the idea of the "Motile Womb Theory," which suggests that learning begins before birth and that babies have innate abilities on the day they are born. The poem also includes a challenge to the reader not to look up information on this theory, as it is suggested that it may not be readily available or supported by evidence. It is not clear what specific theses or arguments the poem presents in support of the Motile Womb Theory, as the poem is brief and does not provide any further details on the theory. It is also not clear what the intended purpose or message of the poem is.

The Mobile Womb Theory (MWT) is a hypothesis that suggests that the fetus learns about three dimensions (also known as the 6 degrees of freedom) through movement and experience with being transported in vehicles and other moving environments. The theory proposes that movement is important for the normal intellectual development of newborns, particularly in terms of their understanding of 3D space. It is based on the idea of the "Motile Womb," or a mother who is constantly moving, as a way for the fetus to learn and develop. It is not clear what evidence or research supports this theory or how it has been tested or studied.

It hasn't been tested and I'm not aware of research except that babies are born with some seemingly innate knowledge of physics. I am suggesting that this is because babies can feel inertia. There is a video on youtube of a baby standing up in the womb, and Gazelles can jump and run and Ibexes can descend a mountain on their first day. My thesis is that Human newborns have the cognitive capacity for this, but they no longer have the supporting "matrix" or scaffolding of a womb, so they can no longer lift their own weight and can't hold their head up very well, and that they have too much fat to do so without assistance.

It appears that the Mobile Womb Theory (MWT) is a hypothesis that has not been tested or supported by research. You mention that babies are born with some innate knowledge of physics, which may suggest that they are able to sense inertial forces. You also reference a video of a baby standing up in the womb and the ability of certain animals to perform physical feats on their first day of life as evidence for the MWT.

Your thesis is that human newborns have the cognitive capacity to perform these feats, but lack the physical support of the womb and have too much fat to do so without assistance.



