￼

Lee Kuiper

72 reviews

Follow

November 30, 2022

“It is a thrilling time to be alive.”

I’m not one to normally utter such words. In fact, I didn’t say those words just now… I quoted them from the first page. But as I read further into The Romance of Reality I found myself agreeing and actually thinking those exact words. Any book that can convince a self-proclaimed “realist” (read: pessimist) that it’s a thrilling time to be alive has to have done something right.

So why it is a thrilling time to be alive?

Bobby Azarian ties together a lot of concepts and presents them coherently as something new and clear, something exciting and thought-provoking, something actually worthy of being called a new paradigm. Basically, I felt thrilled to be reading about the way in which so many scientific concepts are (and so much disparate research is) beginning to tie together in “a theory of everything” that is simple enough for me to comprehend.

The book is very well-researched. Azarian has clearly done his homework (the book acts as a compendium on complexity science, cybernetics, information theory, evolution, adaptation, and emergence) and synthesizes the ideas in a clear and presentable manner. Reading this book was like getting up to date on a lot of research that slowly starts to coalesce: starting a chain reaction that culminates in a new way to see cosmological evolution, life, and purpose.

The scientific paradigm most of us are running is probably based on reductionism since that has been the scientific zeitgeist of the last several hundred years: study things by observing them and experimenting with them on the smallest level possible; break things down to their most basic parts to understand them. Reductionism has taught us many things but it should never have become our myopic approach to the scientific process. Another predominant paradigm most of us are running is that of entropy as utterly ubiquitous, fundamental, and inexorable. Entropy is those things but only in certain situations, not all situations. Most importantly, entropy isn’t as dire and depressing as most of us think.

Now enter the paradigm (and booming research) of complexity science and the nuanced understanding of entropy within an open system…with those two lenses everything begins to look differently…most notably, less bleak.

The 2nd law of thermodynamics states that all energy moves towards, and eventually achieves, a state of equilibrium (i.e. heat moves from hot objects to cold objects); entropy is associated with a state of disorder resulting from that process of energy transfer. People get fixated on the movement towards equilibrium as overall entropic which is to say things are universally moving towards more disorder. This is actually only partially true; it is only true in a closed system of energy. Earth happens not to be a closed system of energy but an open system. Earth constantly receives free energy from the sun (not to mention all the former solar energy stored on and in the earth). This is extremely important and too often missed.

Suddenly, there is excess (free) energy in a system which has to be used up (dissipated). But even as that energy is used up it is immediately replenished (at least partially). Systems of energy dissipation can and do become more efficient at dissipating energy over time. Slowly, the inevitable byproduct of their increased energy dissipation is increased complexity. That means that as time goes on systems become better at using energy and also better at becoming organized in a complex manner. Play that process out for billions of years and impressive changes occur, accumulating to dramatic levels. Behold the power of repeating (feedback) loops and increasing levels.

The details of this process are the focus of the first half of the book.* It turns out that the Darwinian process of natural selection is more universal than with only biological systems. Basically, systems (or even simple chemical configurations and/or simple physical configurations: molecular, atomic, etc) that are more stable tend to be more resilient and thus, tend to survive and stick around in an environment. Nature is “selecting” the most resilient and stable configurations. This is not done by an agent but by the simple fact that the things that are unstable don’t last as long or survive as robustly as things that are stable. If a stable configuration can survive due to its stability, there is a higher chance other chemicals and/or molecules will eventually find their way into that stable configuration by the sheer fact that the unstable configurations break down and the system will keep trying new configurations as energy moves through it. Trial and error. Given enough time stable structures will increase in number and persist while unstable structures come into existence only briefly before falling out of their unstable configuration and ceasing to exist or rearranging into a different configuration.

How do things like molecular configurations come about in the first place? We know objects like the sun heat things like the air up. Energy in the form of light bumps into molecules in the air (hydrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, etc) and stimulates them: when bumped the molecules move. Temperature is a measure of the amount of movement in a group of molecules (how stimulated they are) so the more energy present (moving/bumping) in a group of molecules the more those molecules (particles, atoms, etc) are stimulated and move around in order to dissipate that energy. The more energy feeding into something, the more the molecules are moving around and inevitably bumping into each other and occasionally stick together. If the the new configuration helps to dissipate the energy that is presently bumping around the configuration will hold together better and longer (sometimes as long as there is a steady flow of energy present) because it is more efficient at moving the universe towards energy equilibrium at that tiny, local level.

So, to stick to the analogy of Darwinianism, what is the engine of configuration creation? And what causes configuration mutation? Free energy moving into and through matter is an engine in an of itself. When energy flows through matter it inherently causes movement within that matter. Configuration mutation is caused by matter trying different variations in configurations —matter exploring various structural states (and eventually, exploring various functional states). Random molecular movement means that the molecules (or particles, systems, etc) inevitably try random (and non-random) configurations because they’re bumping around trying to get rid of the incoming energy as fast and easily as possible. The faster, easier, and more efficiently a configuration can dissipate energy the more “successful” (or “fit”) it is, thermodynamically speaking (since everything in the universe is trying to get to a place of equilibrium).

As that process bootstraps itself upward to greater and greater entropic efficiency it pulls things together and assembles groups of configurations. This is the world of autocatalytic sets. Sets or groups of things are often more efficient than individual pieces are on their own. We call this symbiosis and/or synergy. With synergy the output of a group is greater than the sum of its parts individually. That means efficiency gains are inherently found by non-agentic systems simply by the fact that a configuration which explores new arrangements eventually tries cooperating with another different configuration. The two configurations doing two different things can be symbiotic, helping themselves without hurting each other. If this joint configuration is found it is often kept since it can help itself more and hurt itself less. Therefore, there is an inherent attraction for systems to cooperate. Over time, new cooperating configurations create new meta-configurations which are more efficient than the non-cooperating individual configurations.**

Eventually you get to the example of multi-cellular organisms coming out of single celled organisms. At one (or many) point(s) in history a cell entered into the membrane of another cell. Eventually, that cell inside a cell tried new things and realized it could help in ways that gave both itself and the cell in which it resided competitive advantages. Multi-cellular organisms are generally more efficient and have more synergy than single-celled organisms since the cells can focus on different symbiotic tasks and find new energy to exploit. (Single celled organisms still exist today because they found a very stable and efficient configuration).***

Now things start to get interesting. Darwinian evolution is a process of knowledge creation. It is a process that created itself (autopoeisis) and continues to create itself through underlying processes. As an organism (like an animal) lives its life it learns how to survive and reproduce. The better an organism is at those two things the better it generally tends to do; better meaning the longer it lives and the more it is able to reproduce. The subtext of what is happening is that the animal is a specific instantiation of nature that is learning about the environment in which is exists. The animal is learning by exploring and the more successful it is at exploring and learning the more useful information it embodies. If that animal can pass that useful information onto the next generation through mating and upbringing then that animal is increasing the amount of useful information about a specific environment. Slowly, generationally, genetically, memetically, a species will embody more and more information about the environment where it is trying to survive and reproduce. We often call useful and applicable information “knowledge.” In this case, information that is useful for the species to survive and reproduce is adaptive information: information that helps the animal adapt. Adaptive information (like knowledge) often helps an organism survive and reproduce. Evolution is therefore a knowledge creation process.

Incrementally nature has been evolving various species to fill every exploitable niche in a given environment. As the niches are created, explored, and exploited more knowledge is added to the universe through the overall diversity of instantiations —various entities (i.e. plants, animals, humans, culture, etc)— that all seek to survive and reproduce in their respective niches. The longer this happens the wider and higher nature’s branches evolve and the deeper nature’s roots dig. Nature is learning about itself through entities that learn about their environments. Put another way, “the entire universe… is undergoing adaptive transformation.” Extrapolate this process out in all directions and it all starts to coalesce into a bigger picture: “we are a way for the cosmos to know itself.” (Karl Sagan)

Although the exact details and moments are contested, life eventually emerges through the thermodynamic process of disorganized matter becoming organized. “Energy is nature’s fundamental organizing force…[and] it is the concentrated flow of energy through matter that arranges nonliving elements into a configuration that is ‘alive’. By promoting self-organization, energy flux gradually converts a clump of mindless molecules into information-processing machinery with agency…The flow of energy builds agents from inanimate matter by organizing chemical systems into autonomous computational machines that gather information about the world and use that knowledge to perpetuate and spread life further.”

The implication of biology (and evolution) being a form of computation —“information processing performed by biological machinery”— is thought-provoking to say the least. This is only really the first half of the book. Seeing the process of Universal Darwinianism (mutation and natural selection applied cosmologically) and Universal Bayesianism (building a mental model and updating that model as the entity goes on: learning) play out seamlessly throughout cosmic history will start to enable one to see a bigger picture, to create a new internal paradigm, to realize the beauty of a simple process running consistently through reality and enlivening it; seeing such a view of reality is romantic and, indeed, thrilling.

* * *

*In an open thermodynamic system there is a constant energy gradient (i.e. difference in energy). The second law of thermodynamics states that the universe always seeks to get to energy equilibrium so a flow of energy will alway act in ways that are attempting to best eliminate the energy gradient. A more efficient means of flowing energy is one that is better at eliminating an energy gradient. Given the aforementioned laws, this is the direction the universe seeks to go. In a closed system thermodynamic equilibrium is often achieved as the system figures out ways to flow the energy (eliminate the gradient) efficiently so it is all at the same level. However, in an open system the gradient continues to exists due to incoming energy. Because of this steady incoming energy various functional structures form with the “purpose” of eliminating that energy gradient and achieving energy equilibrium. The longer the system stays open (i.e. the longer the gradient exists) the more functional structures are created and the more complex they become as they continue to seek more efficient means of energy dissipation.


** Things like dissipative structures are ordered patterns (configurations) that naturally and spontaneously emerge. Think of a vortex that forms when you pull the drain plug in a tub full of water. That vortex is an emergent phenomena; it is an organized pattern which emerges because that pattern is the most efficient pattern that the collection of water molecules can self-assemble into in order to dissipate the energy gradient. If the tub is constantly receiving water (and the drain is constantly open) a steady-state of order emerges and will exist as long those conditions persist. Biology is essentially an emergent phenomenon, doing the same thing (albeit on much more complex scale) through the fact that there is constantly free energy coming in from the sun. But before that happens (and under certain dynamic situations) nature finds and creates nonliving (abiotic) steady state patterns that exist for long enough to start assembling (through phase transitions) into more complex steady states that slowly start to exhibit “energy-seeking behavior.” What starts out as an efficient way to dissipate energy eventually becomes a pattern (entity?) seeking more energy in order to dissipate it. Of course, the pattern (which eventually does evolve into an entity) does not know or think its purpose/motivation is to better dissipate energy…even though that may be largely true. “Biology was the inevitable results of dissipative adaptation, autocatalysis, and non-equilibrium phase transitions. These organizing mechanisms built a biochemical flow channel to resolve a thermodynamic imbalance arising from free energy buildup on a sunny, wet, geochemically active planet.”


***There is an important pivot in the chapters about entropy where the nuances of Statistical Entropy and Shannon Entropy (as opposed to Thermal Entropy) are fleshed out. Statistical entropy relates to the fact that there are more ways for something to be disorganized rather than organized. Statistically speaking, information is more likely to be disordered. “Here is where it becomes useful to picture entropy as disorder…: there are many more ways for your room to be a complete mess (disordered) than there are ways of being neatly organized.” Knowledge is information that can be used to get everything in the room into an organized manner. There are only a certain amount of micro states (specific ways) your belongings can be arranged as a whole (macro state) in an organized manner. Getting your room from disorganized to organized requires physical energy but also information about ways in which all the items can be arranged in a way that makes sense, is understandable, useful, and accessible.

“How can organization persist and grow if an increasingly disordered state of the system is so much more likely?” Ordered systems can stay organized by using information to build more and better functional structures for metabolizing free energy. In other words, “…the cost of building and maintaining structural and functional order at the macro level is the energetic disorder of heat at the micro level.” Small pockets of information and organization can exist and grow but outside of those pockets informational disorder (statistical entropy) and heat (thermal entropy) do increase at a universal level.

Shannon Entropy is about reducing uncertainty by gaining and using information; it gets complicated quickly as entropy starts to mean so many different things once one begins to dive into information theory and cybernetics. Essentially, an entity can acquire information and perform computation (cognition) in an appropriate natural environment in order to avoid death, decay, and disorder; it must use information and cognition to extract energy (food), avoid threats (predators), and make copies of itself (reproduce). Biology starts to become more and more about computing information to reduce uncertainty and thus, can be mathematically quantified and ushered into the realm of algorithms. This is where my head starts to spin.

1 like

