Extended phenomenological cognition and evolutionary-developmental biology. In the next section of the article, we attempt to clarify these ideas via some examples of 
extended phenomenological-cognitive science. In order to more fully develop the idea that 
EPCS are multi-scale self-organizing systems, in this section, we connect extended phenomenology-cognition to another recent topic in biology, the relationship among plasticity, 
robustness, and autonomy in development (see also Thompson, 2007; Thompson & Staple- 
ton, 2008). Phenotypic plasticity is the phenomenon in which genetically identical individuals will develop different phenotypic traits in different environmental conditions (Kaplan, 
2008). Because of phenotypic plasticity, a single genotype or genome can produce many different phenotypes depending on environmental and developmental contingencies (Gilbert 
and Epel, 2009). Phenotypic plasticity is just one example of epigenomic processes in which 
various mechanisms create phenotypic variation without altering base-pair nucleotide gene 
sequences, altering the expression of genes but not the gene sequence. In contrast, there are 
cases in which genetic or environmental changes have no phenotypic effect. This persis- 
tence of a particular organism’s traits across environmental or genetic changes is called robustness. Robustess is illustrated by various knock-out experiments whereby a particular 
gene (or group of genes) known to be involved in the development of some protein or phenotypic trait is disabled without disturbing the presence or production of the developmental 
end product in question (Jablonka & Lamb, 2005). To account for and model robustness, developmental biologists have called upon dynamical systems theory. The ongoing development of an organism acts as a high-order constraint, which enslaves the components neces- 
sary to maintain its dynamics. Because of this, a developing system will have highly plastic boundaries, and it will be composed of different enslaved components over time.

This plasticity serves the autonomy and robustness of the developing organism, making it more likely 
to be viable. Robustness is closely related to autonomy, another key concept in evolutionary-developmental biology. Autonomy is the property of living systems to make use of their 
environments to maintain themselves. Autonomy is sometimes explained in terms of recursive self-maintenance. 

Some systems are plastic such that they can maintain stability not 
only within certain ranges of conditions but also within certain ranges of changes of conditions: They can switch to deploying different processes depending on conditions they detect 
in the environment.