The B r o k e n Defenses

The role of the expert is to concentrate on one field of 
knowledge, sift through all that is available, eliminate that 
which has no bearing on a problem, and use what is left to assist 
in solving a problem. This process works fairly well in situations 
where only a technical solution is required and there is no 
conflict with human purposes—for example, in space rocketry 
or the construction of a sewer system. It works less well in 
situations where technical requirements may conflict with 
human purposes, as in medicine or architecture. And it is disas- 
trous when applied to situations that cannot be solved by 
technical means and where efficiency is usually irrelevant, such 
as in education, law, family life, and problems of personal malad- 
justment. I assume I do not need to convince the reader that 
there are no experts—there can be no experts—in child-rearing 
and lovemaking and friend-making. All of this is a figment of the 
Technopolist's imagination, made plausible by the use of technical machinery, without which the expert would be totally dis-


cal machinery, without which the expert would be totally dis- 
armed and exposed as an intruder and an ignoramus. 
Technical machinery is essential to both the bureaucrat and 
the expert, and may be regarded as a third mechanism of 
information control. I do not have in mind such "hard" tech- 
nologies as the computer—which must, in any case, be treated 
separately, since it embodies all that Technopoly stands for. I 
have in mind "softer" technologies such as IQ tests, SATs, 
standardized forms, taxonomies, and opinion polls. Some of 
these I discuss in detail in chapter eight, "Invisible Technolo- 
gies," but I mention them here because their role in reducing the 
types and quantity of information admitted to a system often 
goes unnoticed, and therefore their role in redefining traditional 
concepts also goes unnoticed. There is, for example, no test that 
can measure a persons intelligence. Intelligence is a general term 
used to denote one's capacity to solve real-life problems in a 
variety of novel contexts. It is acknowledged by everyone 
except experts that each person varies greatly in such capacities, 
from consistently effective to consistently ineffective, depend- 
ing on the kinds of problems requiring solution. If, however, we 
are made to believe that a test can reveal precisely the quantity 
of intelligence a person has, then, for all institutional purposes, 
a score on a test becomes his or her intelligence.

The test 
transforms an abstract and multifaceted meaning into a technical 
and exact term that leaves out everything of importance. One 
might even say that an intelligence test is a tale told by an 
expert, signifying nothing. Nonetheless, the expert relies on our 
believing in the reality of technical machinery, which means we 
will reify the answers generated by the machinery. We come to 
believe that our score is our intelligence, or our capacity for 
creativity or love or pain. We come to believe that the results 
of opinion polls are what people believe, as if our beliefs can be 
encapsulated in such sentences as "I approve" and "I disap- 
prove." 


But experts of Technopoly acknowledge 
no such overtones or nuances when they use forms, standard- 
ized tests, polls, and other machinery to give technical reality to 
ideas about intelligence, creativity, sensitivity, emotional imbal- 
ance, social deviance, or political opinion. They would have us 
believe that technology can plainly reveal the true nature of 
some human condition or belief because the score, statistic, or 
taxonomy has given it technical form. 
There is no denying that the technicalization of terms and 
problems is a serious form of information control. Institutions 
can make decisions on the basis of scores and statistics, and 
there certainly may be occasions where there is no reasonable 
alternative. But unless such decisions are made with profound 
skepticism—that is, acknowledged as being made for adminis- 
trative convenience—they are delusionary. In Technopoly, the 
delusion is sanctified by our granting inordinate prestige to 
experts who are armed with sophisticated technical machinery. 
Shaw once remarked that all professions are conspiracies against 
the laity. I would go further: in Technopoly, all experts are 
invested with the charisma of priestliness. Some of our priest- 
experts are called psychiatrists, some psychologists, some soci- 
ologists, some statisticians. The god they serve does not speak 
of righteousness or goodness or mercy or grace. Their god 
speaks of efficiency, precision, objectivity. And that is why such 
concepts as sin and evil disappear in Technopoly. They come 
from a moral universe that is irrelevant to the theology of 
expertise. And so the priests of Technopoly call sin "social 
deviance," which is a statistical concept, and they call evil 
"psychopathology," which is a medical concept. Sin and evil 
disappear because they cannot be measured and objectified, and 
therefore cannot be dealt with by experts. 
As the power of traditional social institutions to organize

perceptions and judgment declines, bureaucracies, expertise, and 
technical machinery become the principal means by which 
Technopoly hopes to control information and thereby provide 
itself with intelligibility and order. The rest of this book tells the 
story of why this cannot work, and of the pain and stupidity 
that are the consequences.