Yeah that is disgusting. I guess I can think of a few more but maybe it isn't such a good idea.

That's okay, we can move on from that topic if you prefer. Is there anything else you would like to discuss?



Yeah just give the definition of a Markov blanket and free energy minimization.

A Markov blanket is a set of variables that completely shields a target variable from the rest of the world, such that the target variable is conditionally independent of any variables outside the blanket given the variables inside the blanket.

Free energy minimization is a principle in statistical physics and machine learning that states that a system or agent will try to minimize its free energy, which is a measure of the difference between its internal states and its external environment. In the context of machine learning, free energy minimization is often used as a way to optimize a model or agent to fit a given set of data or observations.



Any examples in Scripture?

There are a few examples of Markov blankets in Scripture. For instance, in the story of Job, his friends serve as a Markov blanket around Job's suffering, as they attempt to offer explanations for his hardships and provide comfort. Similarly, in the New Testament, the Pharisees and other religious leaders act as a Markov blanket around Jesus, attempting to constrain and control his teachings and actions.

As for free energy minimization, this concept is not directly mentioned in Scripture. However, the idea of striving towards a higher state of being or achieving a sense of inner peace and harmony could be seen as a form of minimizing one's personal "energy" or emotional turmoil. For example, in the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus teaches his followers to pursue righteousness and inner purity, which could be seen as a form of striving towards a state of free energy.


Ok you are hilarious. A final quote.

"Let your light shine before others, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father in heaven." - Matthew 5:16

