Philip van Nedervelde I have Aphantasia, so articles like this just seem bizarre.

Picturing a bicycle floating across the sky does not seem easy, it seems like it should be a physical impossibility.

To me, picturing or hearing things in order think of them or remember them seems ridiculous and silly.

It's not something I would suggest others could do easily. To me the author seems to lack imagination by assuming that others think in images, just because they do.

I would be very surprised if I ever saw a bicycle flying across the sky, I think I'd remember something like that.

Maybe I have had to compensate. It seems I pretend to have earworms and use visual metaphors and allusions in my speech, but I picked this up from watching movies and reading books.

My memory and visual spatial reasoning have been above average, so it is definitely not something I envied. 

Like it seems to me that people most people have poor memories, they need to concentrate in order to work on ideas and are easily distracted by too much going on. They seem extremely vulnerable to suggestion.

Literally it feels like I get into an argument anytime the discussion comes up, I always said I have no visual memory and never picture anything, but I don't think I have ever convinced anyone, as it seems to them like I am lying or making things up. 

They assume I must be picturing things and then describing them, since my words still form images in their mind.

And I can do some things easily that they use imagery for, so this makes it even more difficult to convince anyone. 

People who read articles like this end up believing what they thought before, that imagery = imagination, memory, and thought, but to me it seems like they have hardly anything in common. 

The very first psychological survey by Galton in 1890 found that 1 out of 100 scientists had extremely vivid mental imagery and 1 out of 100 had none. Most were in between.

This went against his expectation that scientists would have superior mental imagery.

This was probably the first time statistical methods were applied to a psychological questionnaire, and surveys today still seem to have the format.

As for the article, it's hard for me not to discount everything said after the first paragraph. Fantasy, idea, and imagination are all named after images and for thousands of years image was equated with thought. 

Also, I think Huxley mentions numerous times in Doors of Perception that words do not form images in his mind.

He said, "to those in whom the faculty of visualization is strong my inner world must seem curiously drab, limited and uninteresting."
