Now, quite banal instances of human creativity are preposterously overvalued. Witness the often conceited superiority of those in only tangentially creative professions. Why should a newspaper columnist or an advertising copywriter feel himself to be more interesting than a banker or a cleaner? I have lawyer friends who complain of the rictus countenances and slipping eye-contact they get from artistic types at parties. But I know those parties. And I know my lawyers are the most interesting people in the room.

Sceptics such as the psychology professor Gary Marcus argue that AI cannot be creative because it lacks internal understanding, is merely a “king of pastiche”, blindly pasting together influences from human artists. But this is close to what those original artists were doing too — the artist’s great struggle, the critic Harold Bloom argues, is confronting and overcoming the influence of predecessors. And does it even matter what’s going on internally now that human audiences fail to distinguish between a composition by a robot and one by Bach, and tell researchers they prefer a painting by an AI to one by a person?

How impressive is a lot of human creativity? As the education expert Daisy Christodoulou puts it, “ChatGPT sometimes produces superficially plausible essays that fall apart under closer scrutiny. But plenty of humans write essays like that too. In fact, it is one of the criticisms of PPE graduates.”

AI should disillusion us of the spurious glamour of creativity. It will be good for those who have suffered the social condescension of “creatives”. It may even be good for a country whose creative class has long assumed an undue authority and delivered us catastrophic experiments in government by arts graduates. Well, I hope AI doesn’t take those students’ jobs. But I also hope it helps us to see that being creative does not inevitably imply that you are unusually interesting or unusually intelligent.

JAMES MARRIOTT

AI spells trouble for creatives — about time too

Machines that can write and paint are a welcome rebuff to the prestige enjoyed by artistic types

James Marriott

Wednesday January 25 2023, 9.00pm, The Times



