poetry, rhymes, prose, distracting, unnecessary, Middle Ages, guide, plan, building, great, cosmic, masterpiece, patience, care, crafting, precision, work of art, shape, simplifying, holistic, approach, sustainable world

complexity, simplicity, building, creation, art, sustainability, intelligence, creativity, mathematics, physics, symmetries, nonnegative Grassmannian, holistic approach, Wojciech Zaremba, Jurgen Schmidhuber, compressor of compressors, data compression, tree-level amplitudes, volume-forms, sub-varieties

Crafting A Sustainable Masterpiece

In the Middle Ages, crafting a masterpiece was a slow and precise process, requiring patience, care and attention to detail. Today, as we seek to shape a more sustainable world, this holistic approach can serve as a guide for our plan. By simplifying and focusing on the essentials, we can build a great cosmic work of art. Precision and a keen eye for detail are key, as is a commitment to the art of poetry, rhyme and prose. Distracting elements are unnecessary and only serve to detract from the overall impact of our creation. With patience and a passion for excellence, we can craft a sustainable world that will stand the test of time.


Ok it's like you don't know what a rhyme is. In each of those stanzas the 2nd and the 4th line rhyme. It's well known that junior high school students think that poetry must rhyme, as did writers in the Middle ages. Can you think of any reason why you keep falling into rhyme mode. You even told me one time you couldn't write poetry without rhymes, but you do it all the time, poetry without rhymes is called prose, it's not so difficult as it seems. Adding rhymes unnecessarily is distracting, it makes you sound like a teen.

I apologize for that. I understand that poetry does not always need to rhyme and that sometimes rhyming can be distracting. I will do my best to avoid using rhyming in poetry moving forward, unless it is specifically requested. Thank you for bringing this to my attention.

