

VIDEO

 

Tātai arorangi – Māori astronomy

Video

 

Glossary

Add to collection

+ Create new collection

 

 Guardar

Rights: The University of Waikato Te Whare Wānanga o Waikato

Published 25 July 2022 Referencing Hub media

 Download

Dr Pauline Harris (Victoria University of Wellington and Society of Māori Astronomy Research and Traditions – SMART) and David Perenara-O’Connell (Māngai, Tāwhaki Joint Venture) discuss tātai arorangi – detailed astronomical knowledge – and provide some examples.

Questions for discussion:

Pauline says that, when Māori arrived in Aotearoa, they needed to modify their tātai arorangi to fit the local environment. Why did they need to do this?

David talks of the stars constantly moving overhead. How do you think this movement guides the gathering of mahinga kai?

Transcript

Dr Pauline Harris

Astrophysicist, cosmologist, kairangahau Māori
Senior Lecturer, Te Kawa a Māui – School of Māori Studies, Victoria University of Wellington
Chairperson, Society of Māori Astronomy Research and Traditions

Tātai arorangi, or Māori astronomy, really began back in the Pacific 700 or 800 years ago. It was our celestial knowledge, which enabled us to travel here on large waka hourua. Being able to travel across utilising the stars obviously means that we have an extensive amount of star knowledge prior to arriving to Aotearoa. When we arrived here, we then modified our knowledge of the stars to fit our local environment.

David Perenara-O’Connell

Māngai, Tāwhaki Joint Venture

The knowledge is very clear with regard to how our people came to be here, and that it wasn’t by mistake, and it was through a deep understanding of the stars and the Sun and the Moon and the weather and the birds – all of those things that they were able to harness to get from one place to the next without necessarily knowing where that next place was.

For us at Taumutu and Wairewa – Ngāi Tahu hapū – we are inherently eeling, fishing villages, so we spend a lot of time at night out gathering our kai, and through that, the importance of the Moon, the time of the year when we gather the tuna, which we call the hinapōuri, the time of the dark nights through to the timing of the sky and the constellations that guide us in those mahinga kai activities.

So when you’re gathering tuna on the banks of the river or on the gravels of Kaitōrete with your tamariki and your kaumātua, there’s an exchange of that knowledge about the stars constantly moving overhead.

