
The ‘selfishness’ of ACK systems, the ontological basis for using the term ‘self’ is causally manifested and located in the circular relations that constitute them. They are deviation-amplifying systems [27], or thermodynamically speaking, self-amplifying sinks that feedback (F2) internally developed forces to amplify their own input pulling resources (potential) into their own production or progressive ordering [20].

(ii) Von Bertalanffy, Schrödinger and Prigogine
Von Bertalanffy [28], under the rubric of ‘open systems’, and Schrödinger [29] comparing living things to flames, helped to soften the physics versus biology problem by pointing out that as long as living systems produced enough entropy to compensate for their own internal entropy reduction (the order that defines them or potential they pull into themselves) so as to satisfy the balance equation of the second law (2.1) then the second law as classically stated would not be violated. Later Prigogine [30] made the same point under the term ‘dissipative structure’. The balance equation can then be separated into two terms. The first term is a measure of the change in entropy due to the ‘negentropy’, using Schrödinger's term, or the potential (energy gradients) on which such systems ‘feed’ and import into the system, and the second term is the entropy produced and dissipated into the environment by the system's ordering, and departure from equilibrium

ΔSe+ΔSi>0.
4.1
Living things and all non-living ACKs on this view are permitted to exist as long as they pay their ‘entropy debt’ [4,5]. This contributed to the recognition of living things as flow structures, but left the main problem still unsolved.

Permitted to exist, yes, but why should they? What explains their opportunistic origins, the urgency toward existence that brings them into being, motivates them while developing progressively further from equilibrium to begin with? The entire pattern of the origin and evolution of life and mind is characterized by this behaviour. What is the universality that explains, in effect, why the world is the order production business?

(iii) Order from disorder or macro from micro and the need for a physical selection principle
The first step towards the answer is to understand that spontaneous ordering (the production of ACK states), as a micro (disordered) to macro (ordered) transformation, is a process of selection [20,21]. By definition, it is the selection of some much smaller number of accessible microstates M2 (the new ordered macro state) from some initially much larger set M1. This can be equivalently understood as the spontaneous production of constraints on the previously disordered or less ordered microstates dramatically constraining their degrees of freedom in the production of the ordered flow. In short, selection is entailed by autocatakinetics (spontaneous ordering) [20], viz. if the latter has happened/is happening then a process of selection has/is taken(ing) place. But, clearly, the fact that this selection is not between replicating entities (biological or ‘natural’ selection), while at the same time observed in simple physical systems forces the insight that there must be an overriding physical selection principle to account for it.

(iv) Autocatakinetic closure and the expansion of space–time
The second step towards the solution to the universal ordering problem is given by a more detailed look at what happens structurally with the individuation, or entification and progressive ordering of an ACK. The origin of such a system occurs following a symmetry-breaking event when autocatakinetic closure takes.

place and a new kind of causality, the self-amplifying circular closure of the constitutive relations that define the system as distinct literally comes into being (figure 5, and figure 4 for the generalized constitutive flow schematic) [3,5]


Figure 5 shows the macroscopic flow structure of a BC as hundreds of millions of previously randomly colliding molecules move together. T1 → T2 is the temperature gradient between source and sink that motivates the flow. Because density varies inversely with temperature there is also a density gradient from bottom to top giving groups of molecules (parcels) displaced upward by stochastic collisions (‘fluctuations’ = ‘deviants’ or ‘outliers’) an upward buoyant force. If the gradient is steep enough such that the parcel carries the heat faster towards the heat sink above than can be dissipated by its surrounds we see the beginning of macro being selected from micro as the parcel carries the heat to the surface sink. The upward flow of heat with the parcel at the same time increases the temperature of the upper surface directly above it creating a surface temperature gradient T3 → T4 which acts to further amplify the macroscopic upward flow of heat by pulling the hotter fluid to the cooler surroundings. Here it falls to the bottom where it becomes heated again to continue the constitutive circular relations of the cell and the autocatakinesis that brings it into being and defines it [20].

We are closer to the piece we are looking for, but to understand this more fully one needs to understand structurally or dimensionally what has occurred in this ordering process, and it is that the space–time dimensions of the system have increased by orders of magnitude. In the Boltzmann regime, the actual only measurable dimensions are the mean free path distances and relaxation times (the average times and distances between collisions) of the order of 10−10 cm and 10−15 s, or nanoscale, while in the ordered macro regime measurable dimensions or correlation between components increases to centimetres and seconds. If the micro mode were roughly scaled to human size, the macroscale would be many times greater than the circumference of the Earth developing and persisting of time scales greater than the 4.5 GY of planetary evolution. What does it mean?

(v) Final clue from the split balance equation of the second law
Revisiting the split balance equation of the second law (4.1) and the general point made by von Bertalanffy, Schrödinger and Prigogine, but in a whole new light, we immediately find something leading [31]. In particular, the significant point here is not that ordered flows are permitted to exist as long as they produce enough entropy to compensate for their internal entropy reduction. It is that with selection of macro from micro (spontaneous ordering) to occur the rate of entropy production must always go up. In fact, in more illuminating terms, the more order produced the greater the rate of entropy production is going to be.

Figure 6 shows the dramatic increase in the rate of entropy production (as heat transport from source to sink) occurring in the transition from disorder to order in a simple experiment similar to the BC in figure 4 further highlighting what we saw in detail above during the production of ACK. It is path selection by rate, and with this the answer to the core question ‘why the world is in the order production business’ is virtually proclaiming itself [4].

Figure 6. 
Caption
Download figureOpen in new tabDownload PowerPoint
(vi) The fourth law of thermodynamics (LMEP) or why the world is in the order production business
The previous sections take us directly to the physical selection principle that accounts for spontaneous ordering. It is the answer to the question that von Bertalanffy, Schrödinger and Prigogine never asked, and it is about path selection or rates. Specifically, ‘which paths out of available paths will a system take to get to equilibrium (maximize the entropy or minimize potentials)?’ The second law, of course, is mute on the subject. It only says that in all natural processes the entropy increases. The answer to this question, and the one that solves the entire question of physical selection, the ‘why’ of universal ordering, life and cognition is the law of maximum entropy production (LMEP) or the fourth law of thermodynamics [1,4,5,26,31–33]:

(the world) a system will select the path or assembly of paths out of available paths that minimizes the potential or maximizes the entropy at the fastest possible rate given the constraints
The fourth law says nothing directly about spontaneous ordering per se, but coupled with the balance equation of the second law the derivation of the universal ordering principle is easy to see, namely:
IF The 4th Law or LMEP (the world selects paths….fastest rate..)
AND IF ordered flow produces entropy at a faster rate than disordered flow (the balance equation of the 2nd Law)
THEN the world can be expected to select order from disorder whenever it gets the chance
And of course, this is just what happens. Like the first and second laws, LMEP meets the most rigorous standard possible in science, namely, stated in a way that subjects it to falsifiability with simple physical experiments, and like the first and second laws, the fourth law has never, in the three and half decades since it was formulated, been falsified (e.g. [26,31,32]). LMEP, which substantially expands thermodynamics is universal in scope applying near and far from equilibrium to all ranges and scales [26,31] (see appendix B).
5. The evolution of life, information and ‘mind’ (cognition)
LMEP when coupled with the relational, self-referencing and inherently self-amplifying circular causality of autocatakinesis (ACK + LMEP = ACKLMEP) dissolves the problem of the ‘two opposing rivers’ and gives us the universal (physical) basis for the nature of life to fill out the dimensions of space–time captured in the biological extremum or fecundity principle on which natural selection depends [5,20,34]. It gives us the agential or motivated activity missing in theories of cognition (mind) and its evolution including the most recent 4E post-computationalist theories [27,35] whose Cartesian dualist ancestry continues to bleed through. But while LMEP gives us ACK systems, and ACKLMEP most significantly thus gives us the urgency towards existence, the filling out of space–time and the generics of spontaneous ordering, it does not give us the special cases of life and cognition.

(a) What particularly and why particularly is life?
All living/cognitive systems are ACK systems, but not all ACK systems are living or cognizing. What is it that distinguishes living from non-living systems (i) observing them from outside; or (ii) observing them inside? The short answer to (i) is ‘intentionality’, a term which needs immediate decontamination from the idea of ‘ends-in-mind’ (confined to human mental states a very lately evolved case). Expanding on Brentano [36], we define intentionality as end-directed behaviour prospectively controlled or determined by semantic content or meaning [37,38].

We do not invoke intentionality, or meaning, to explain the flow of a river down a slope or heat down a gradient, or the ‘selfish’ behaviour of abiotic ACKs pulling resources into their own ordering because these processes are determined by local force fields and potentials. By contrast, when a bacterium swims up a gradient its behaviour is seen to go in a direction that is oftentimes different, if not directly opposite to that determined by local potentials. Unlike rivers, or ACKs like the BC which are captives of their local gradients or potentials, e.g. remove the heat source of a BC and it ‘dies’, living systems behave arbitrarily with respect to their local potentials [5]. If a food supply is cut off say from a bacterium it may go dormant until a new potential arises, or its activity may actually increase as it seeks to find new discontinuously located potentials to feed on.

This, the intentionality of living things, is life's central distinguishing feature. Living systems are epistemic (cognitive) systems that constitute their ACK over times and distances that are arbitrary with respect to local potentials using instead their ‘on board’ potential (EIII in figure 1) and information (in the semantic or meaningful sense)3 to seek out and access non-local potentials and access otherwise inaccessible dimensions of space–time [5]. The dramatic increase to otherwise inaccessible dissipative dimensions afforded by the origin and progressive ordering of life and its cognitive functioning answers the ‘why’ question in the specific case. Rather than being incommensurable with the physical world as Cartesian metaphysics has it, cognition, or intentionality, and perception, the growing epistemic dimension of the world, or mind in nature, is seen instead as a direct manifestation of it [27,39].

(b) The first law, time-translation symmetry and the physical basis for information
There is still an important missing piece. Life is distinguished by end-directedness determined by meaning or information, but as much as ACKLMEP and its active, ‘selfish’ relational ontology gives us, the ontological ground for the information itself still needs to be given. Specifically, where does meaning come from in a physical world of ‘meaningless’ particles? Cartesianism and heirs give us some version of the Cartesian circle with ‘mind’, having no possible relational connection to an outside world, simply perceiving itself. Information is something created or constructed in ‘minds’ not something otherwise existing in the world. Such a view, the idea that perception is essentially a creative process of mental operations or computations inside ‘minds’ or brains is still the dominant view today. CTM (the computational theory of mind) is a widely held form of this. ‘Perceiving as predicting’, a current leading trend in computational neuroscience, takes perception to be the probabilistic computation of models created in the brain. Adherents of this view, who as already noted assert that living things violate the second law [17], proclaim a ‘deep unity between perception and imagination’ [40]. Divorced from thermodynamics all of these views have the identical problem accounting for the agency, active striving or motivated activity that account for life and its cognitive properties, and none of them including 4E versions of cognition has an account other than being imaginatively created as to how meaning comes into the world, or if it did how an epistemic or cognitive agent could connect with it.4

Finally, beyond these problems, cognition ‘in brains’ models, have the further problem that cognitive functioning as noted being coextensive with life begins long before there were human brains or brains at all. Perception is clearly something much, much deeper and more fundamental than this. It is an entailment of intentionality, the definitive means by which a living thing establishes and maintains its ACKs. But, so where is the information?

The key was given by Gibson [41] and his ecological approach to perception. Perception, as discussed, is exactly the means by which a living thing coordinates its behaviour with respect to non-local potentials, but is not a mental construct at all but rather direct and law based. Constructions, imaginings and models are things humans and other forms of life may use to various degrees, but from this view, this is distinct from perception. Gibson's central insight was that living things are surrounded by ambient energy flows (e.g. optical, mechanical, chemical) for which the mean energy content is extremely low relative to the on-board potentials they use to power their intentional acts [5]. What he recognized was that by virtue of the invariant properties of such flows they lawfully carry information about their distal sources for the prospective control of an epistemic agent's intentional ends (e.g. bacterial chemotaxis and phototaxis). Perception is of that information, and as such is law-based, direct and done without internal representations, computations or inferences.