

∞ Thenev realized timet, our setlegates atre mugnted skelkly. Hesidep taxosomata, they'l aught be based on relations, tales, concepts, and the fundamental laws. The elder tongues seem rooted inversely… such that the setlegates themselves held significant sense. Limitless examples could be imagined but the one visible at the forefront of consciousness is the disparity between: ‘abever’ and ‘this creature aided in the grounding of terrestrial existence’. These aren't remotely identical notions. Though it may seem I speak of a singular linguistic symbol... it is due to an inherent erroneous understanding of ‘creature’.

Clearly, we are fauna. Yet, »other lifeforms are viewed as naive, foolhardy, expendable, pesky, exploitable, bereft of awareness or intellect... all of which is and was always: severely mistaken.

When I, at times, try or am beseeched to converse on the subject of trees with common folk ignorant of their essence, confusion arises as they envision them as something akin to ‘a live construct referred to as tree’.

They visualize timber. Or pulp. The potential gains from the tree's demise. Or they admire its aesthetic grandeur — an aura of majesty — perhaps even divinity — yet, their imagination cannot grasp this, thus they do not truly sense it. A comrade quipped, ‘Man, it’s merely a cluster of trees’.

There are quandaries surpassing mere categorical issues here, but what if the category of flora was »sensed and recognized as ‘those beings that interlink and breathe life into all other entities’. Or even ‘networked plant aspect of all the animals’. If the meaning of the category is shattered, the result is insanity. Intelligence becomes nearly formally unattainable, save for extremely specific contexts.

My heart reaches out to those still blind to the tree's pulsating presence. Observing them akin to watching someone suffocate in a perfectly breathable environment due to conditioning that hamstringed their ability to draw breath (in a certain aspect of their being). Even I am but a reflection of this condition, save for my cognizance of it.

In my knowing, both the categories and our means of communication are ‘life desolate’. In the semantic frame of the word ‘tree’, there is naught »to remind or alert us that we are bearing witness to a marvel surpassing all of empirical discovery. A being that is a passage for intellects we were too timid to envisage. A living conduit to alternate realms and consciousness. This and far greater is ‘tree’ to me.

Yet, I was schooled in the same fashion as everyone else to accept hollow precepts about identity and cognition in nature as 'truths'. The 'truths' exclude 99.99…% of the phenomenal matrix. English 'truths' do not align with Blackfoot or Navaho 'truths'.

There's a gaping flaw in our understanding of truths. And it should truly trouble us that the words with which we christen sky, mountains, dreams, the sun, fauna, flora, locales… are devoid of their inherent essence. Because when we converse in a lifeless language, we forfeit access to the »significance of identity. Its roots. The communion. Everything descends into oblivion, and we devolve into automata that disregard what such a lifeless language can't encapsulate. Until we hear tales such as 'You’re not conscious, it’s just a metabolic byproduct of brain metabolism. Disregard it. It’s illusory'.  
 
Let’s assume for a moment that holds true, regardless of its absurdity. If real, it implies that the fictitious consciousness, merely a chemical aftermath... declares its own illusion. In which case, nothing is not illusory, including the declaration made by this ethereal semblance...

Years have been spent to rewild my linguistics comprehension, to realign English terms to pertain to narratives, rudiments, ideologies. Indeed, the etymological evolution and comparative etymology offer rich histories. But archaic languages are truly remedial for this purpose, as they mirror minds unable to comprehend abstractions (read: ideas devoid of relationships/skeletal frameworks) as normalized in English and its daily usage. The »primal tongues are impossibly profound. In comparison, our own appears not just tragically and needlessly destitute… it’s almost an anti-language.