FALLING AND FORCING 
The difference between spontaneous and non-spontaneous change is one of the most common features 
encountered in everyday experience. It is also the basis of what is often described as “broken 
symmetry” in the world. Some changes are symmetric in the sense that they are just as natural run 
forwards or backwards. This is approximately the case with the collision of two billiard balls in the 
absence of friction. Play the movie of a collision both forwards and backwards and it will be difficult 
to discern which is the “real” version. This is because Newton’s laws of motion are symmetric. But if 
the movie involves fifteen balls colliding with one another, it will often be quite obvious which 
sequence is shown forwards and which is shown backwards. And this doesn’t depend on energy 
being added or friction slowing the velocities. Even on an imaginary frictionless billiard table, this 
can be discovered so long as one begins with an asymmetrically organized arrangement. Thus the 
breaking up of a symmetrically organized triangular array of balls (as in a pool “break”) so that they 
become scattered and careen around the table will be the obvious forward direction, whereas a 
reversal of this movie will appear quite unnatural. However, if we begin the movie at progressively 
later and later points, after each ball has had an opportunity to haphazardly interact dozens of times 
with different balls at different positions around the table, it will become progressively more difficult 
to discern forward- from backward-running movies (Figure 7.1). 
The early phases of such a process are familiar to our everyday experience. Mixing things up is far 
easier, and far more likely, than unmixing them. And once mixed up, things tend to stay that way. This 
spontaneous asymmetry in the pattern of dynamical change is the essence of the second law of 
thermodynamics. And as we have also seen, it is with respect to this spontaneous asymmetry of 
change that emergent processes are typically defined. So before we can make complete sense of the 
dynamics that produces emergent phenomena, it is important to be more precise about what makes this 
form of spontaneous asymmetric change similar to and different from the kind of spontaneous change 
that is exhibited by a body in constant linear motion. 
FIGURE 7.1: A cartoon characterization of the asymmetry implicit in thermodynamic change from a constrained (“ordered”) state 
to a less constrained (“disordered”) state, which tends to occur spontaneously (an orthograde process), contrasted with the 
reversed direction of change, which does not tend to occur spontaneously (a contragrade process), and so only tends to occur in 
response to the imposition of highly constrained external work (arrows in the image on the right). 


The conundrum that heat posed for nineteenth-century physicists was explaining how the dynamics 
of individually colliding billiard balls could be symmetric with respect to time, and thus theoretically 
reversible, and yet their collective behavior is not. The answer was first glimpsed by James Clerk 
Maxwell and later applied to thermodynamic processes by Ludwig Boltzmann in the last half of the 
nineteenth century. Basically, each collision results in changing the velocity and direction of each 
object (billiard ball or molecule), and as more and more collisions ensue, the velocities and 
directions of movement will become more and more divergent from original values, analogous to the 
way that shuffling a deck of cards causes any two cards that were once close together to 
progressively get more and more separated, until they vary around the average degree of separation 
for any two cards. Similarly, as each billiard ball or molecule interacts again and again with others, 
local correlations of position and movement get progressively redistributed. As the collection 
continues to interact (assuming no loss due to friction), it will vacillate around the average 
distribution; but it will be astronomically unlikely to pass through a highly regularized state (like a 
stationary triangular arrangement) ever again. 
This too is a geometric effect, but in this case it involves the geometry of the probable paths of 
change, not the geometry of space-time. It exemplifies the fact that the universe has a deeply 
asymmetric predisposition when it comes to any process involving many components. The probability 
that any interaction will reflect this asymmetric bias is proportional to the number of interacting 
components or features. 
The Newtonian collision between two objects is thus the limiting case, not the rule. It is generally 
possible to discern which way the movie of a dynamical interaction between many objects is being 
played because some large-scale distributional features become very much more likely than others. 
This becomes evident even with only a handful of objects, such as the balls on a billiard table. As we 
add more and more objects and interactions, this asymmetry grows rapidly, quickly reaching the point 
where the probabilities are effectively indistinguishable from 0 and 1 (impossibility and certainty). 
This is the case for most thermodynamic systems, since in even a minuscule volume of liquid or gas 
we may be dealing with billions of molecules, interacting with each other billions of times each 
second. So, in any human-scale thermodynamic process, the probability of reflecting this bias is 
essentially certain. These large numbers guarantee that “more-is-different” with near certainty in any 
microscopic to macroscopic comparison. This more-is-different effect will also turn out to be a key 
factor in the explanation of emergent phenomena, which in all cases involve significant increases in 
scale and a corresponding compounding of lower-level interaction effects. 
Consider one of the most familiar of thermodynamic processes, dissolving some solid—say, a cube 
of sugar—in a container of water. At normal temperatures, a small cube of sugar dissolves naturally 
and effortlessly with a little patience. It is a spontaneous process. Separating it out again, however, 
can be incredibly complicated, laborious, and time-consuming. Even employing the most 
sophisticated of physical-chemical purification processes, you will never fully retrieve the amount 
and structure that you began with. We basically don’t have to intervene in the dissolving of sugar in 
water, unless we want to make the process go faster (by stirring or heating) than it would occur 
spontaneously, but any process that exactly reverses the original mixing will be decidedly non- 
spontaneous, often requiring considerable outside intervention using highly contrived means. The 
partial exception to this takes advantage of another spontaneous process—evaporation—though it 
only separates the water from the sugar and doesn’t produce tiny crystals organized into a cube. 
We take this sort of causal asymmetry for granted, recognizing that some forms of change are 
spontaneous and resistant to intervention, while others require intervention to force them to occur 
because they are resistant to change. Both kinds of change occur because of certain forms of 
interactions and how they are constrained and biased by the conditions within which they occur. So it 
shouldn’t abuse the meaning of “cause-to-happen” to say that both are caused, even though their 
consequences are quite dichotomous. This is made explicit in the classic thermodynamic model 
system: a gas in a container that can be isolated from all outside influences. Asymmetrically heat the 
container, using an external heat source, and the majority of molecules in one region are forced to 
move more rapidly than the majority at some other region. But as soon as the external influence is 
removed, the gas will begin an inevitable transition back to equilibrium, redistributing these local 
differences. In the one case the cause must be imposed from without for change to occur, in the other 
the cause is intrinsic; change will happen unless it is impeded by outside intervention. So, in 
commonsense terms, we say that some things happen “naturally,” while other things don’t. 
For general purposes, then, it would be useful to distinguish between changes that must be forced to 
occur through extrinsic intervention and those that require intervention to prevent them from 
occurring. Surprisingly, there are no terms that characterize this difference. In order to facilitate the 
discussion of how they contribute to the range of dynamical processes we will encounter in the effort 
to explain emergent phenomena, I offer two neologisms:

I will call changes in the state of a system that are consistent with the spontaneous, “natural” 
tendency to change, irrespective of external interference, orthograde changes. The term literally 
refers to going with the grade or tilt or tendency of things, as in falling, or “going along with the 
flow.” In contrast, I will call changes in the state of a system that must be extrinsically forced, 
because they run counter to orthograde tendencies, contragrade changes. 
The usefulness of this distinction may appear to be minimal at this stage of the analysis, since I have 
merely renamed things that are already familiar. Nevertheless, it will become clear later, once we 
begin dealing with processes that no longer exhibit simple thermodynamic tendencies. 
Because we tend to consider orthograde changes “natural,” we might be tempted to describe 
contragrade changes as somehow unnatural. This turns out to be a misleading dichotomy because, as 
we’ll see, even though contragrade changes are not spontaneous and intrinsic, they are in no way 
unnatural or artificial. They are merely the result of the interaction between contrasting orthograde 
processes. Because the world is structured and not uniform, and because there are many distinct 
dimensions of orthograde change possible (involving different properties of things, such as 
temperature, mass, movement, electric charge, structural form, etc.), certain of these tendencies can 
interact in relative isolation from others.3 Contragrade change is the natural consequence of one 
orthograde process influencing a different orthograde process—for example, via some intervening 
medium. This implies that in one sense all change ultimately originates from spontaneous processes. 
It is simply because the world is highly heterogeneous that there can be contragrade processes. Thus, 
although orthograde processes are the basis for all change, the ortho/contra distinction is not 
artificial. 
More precisely, then, we can also distinguish orthograde and contragrade processes in terms of 
relative causal isolation, which also distinguishes intrinsic from extrinsic causal influences. A 
composite system that is isolated from outside interactions will intrinsically exhibit orthograde 
change, but not contragrade change. Contragrade change is only possible with respect to extrinsic 
relationships between systems with different orthograde tendencies. This is just a restatement of the 
isolation conditions for the second law of thermodynamics. But as we will see subsequently, 
reframing thermodynamic processes in orthograde/contragrade terms will provide a much more 
general distinction that will be useful beyond both Newtonian and thermodynamic analyses. 
How might we apply this distinction to more classical approaches to dynamical processes? 
Consider Newton’s laws of motion. A mass moving in a straight line with a constant velocity can be 
described as undergoing orthograde change (of position), whereas a mass acted on by a force and 
altered in velocity and direction can be described as exhibiting contragrade change (for the duration 
of the period in which that force is acting). In a simple thermodynamic system, change toward 
equilibrium is orthograde while change away from equilibrium is contragrade. So the case of sugar 
spontaneously dissolving in a container of water exemplifies an orthograde change, whereas 
processes that a chemist might employ to extract this sugar again would involve contragrade 
processes. 
The more general value of designating terms for these contrary “orientations” of change is that it can 
help us to distinguish the different ways we tend to use the concept of causality. While both the 
spontaneous dissolving of sugar in water and its extraction by chemical means are changes that are 
caused in a generic sense, what we mean by “cause” is quite different in these two situations. Both 
are consistent with the laws of physics and chemistry; they nevertheless differ radically in how these 
causal influences are organized. 
In the case of processes like the dissolving and diffusion of sugar molecules in water, this 
distinction also is relative to scale. The dislodging of a sugar molecule from its crystal lattice is the 
result of microscopic contragrade processes. The molecular collisions and electrochemical 
interactions between water and sugar molecules are contragrade, because the interaction among these 
molecules changes their spontaneous motions and ranges of movement. The continually diverging 
diffusion of sugar molecules into the surrounding water is also the result of contragrade dynamics. 
Each of the innumerable collisions that results in changes in a molecule’s velocity and direction of 
movement is a contragrade event. 
The trajectories of sugar molecules as they interact with neighboring water molecules are more 
likely to expand into new territories. This tendency effectively reflects the geometry of the situation. 
There are more ways for molecules to diverge than to converge in their relative locations. As every 
molecule is bumped nanosecond-to-nanosecond onto a new path, each molecule’s new position gets 
more and more superimposed on the others’ former positions, while their velocities and directions of 
motion also sample values once exhibited by others. This tendency of interacting molecules to wander 
into each other’s spatial positions and dynamical values is responsible for the orthograde dynamic 
that characterizes the global change toward equilibrium. In this way, contragrade dynamics at one 
level produce orthograde dynamics at the higher level.

Another merit of describing change in these complementary terms is that it gives new meaning to the 
defining property of matter—a resistance to change—and the defining property of energy—that which 
is required to overcome resistance to change. Since orthograde processes ensue spontaneously, they 
are ubiquitously present, even during processes of contragrade (forced) changes. A contragrade 
change must therefore derive from two or more orthograde processes, each in some way undoing the 
other’s effects. To put this in the terms introduced in the previous chapter, each must constrain the 
other. The tendency of one orthograde process to realize the full range of its degrees of freedom (e.g., 
the diffusion into all potential locations) must diminish the tendency of another orthograde process to 
realize all its potential degrees of freedom. This is easily demonstrated for interacting thermodynamic 
systems otherwise isolated from other outside influences. Thus, for example, the specific heat of one 
object placed in contact with another with a different specific heat will result in their combined 
development toward a different maximum entropy value than either would reach had they remained 
isolated from one another. This is because there will be a net asymmetric redistribution of the 
molecular motions in the two materials, in which the rate of orthograde change of one will accelerate 
and the other will decelerate with respect to their prior rates of change, since the one is now further 
and the other closer to the maximum entropy state than before. One is thereby relatively deconstrained 
and the other relatively constrained in its domain of possible states. Resistance to change is thus a 
signature of the additive and canceling effects of interacting orthograde dynamics. In this respect, it is 
again roughly analogous to the composition of momenta of colliding objects in Newtonian 
mechanics.4 
Using this insight, we can now redefine the concept of constraint in orthograde and contragrade 
terms. Constraints are defined with respect to orthograde maxima, that is, the point at which an 
orthograde dynamic change is no longer asymmetrical. A constrained orthograde process is thus one 
in which certain dimensions of change are not available. This can be the result of extrinsic bounds on 
these values such as might be imposed by the walls of a container, or the result of contragrade 
processes countering an orthograde change. Interestingly, as we will see in the next chapter, this 
means that contragrade processes at one level can generate the conditions for a higher-level 
orthograde process of constraint generation. 
One benefit of articulating this orthograde/contragrade distinction is that it provides a language for 
describing the dynamical relationships that link different levels of a process. In classical emergentist 
terms, we could even say that in the case of close-to-equilibrium thermodynamics, the orthograde 
increase in entropy is supervenient on the cumulative effects of the contragrade dynamics of incessant 
molecular interactions. This suggests that the orthograde/contragrade distinction may offer a useful 
way to reframe the emergence problem. Indeed, ultimately we will discover that a fundamental 
reversal of orthograde processes is a defining attribute of an emergent transition. 
Under some circumstances (which will be the focus of much of our subsequent analysis), an 
extrinsically perturbing dynamical influence can be highly stable, thus providing an incessant 
contragrade influence. This is, for example, the condition of the Earth as a whole, where the 
perturbations provided by constant low-level solar radiation over billions of years have made life a 
possibility. The constancy of this source of contragrade influence is a critical factor, since its stability 
has allowed the formation of a vast web of dissipative pathways through which energy is released. 
While in transit through terrestrial substrates, this persistent perturbation has been available to drive 
chemical reactions in a myriad of contragrade directions. The result is that otherwise unlikely 
molecular structures are being constantly synthesized even while orthograde thermodynamic 
tendencies tend to break them down. 
Following the Nobel laureate theoretical chemist Ilya Prigogine, who revolutionized how we think 
about such systems, we call the Earth a dissipative system, because it is constantly both taking in and 
dissipating energy. During the time that this dissipative relationship has been stable—roughly for a 
little over 5 billion years—it has made numerous other contragrade processes possible, including 
nearly all of the contragrade chemistry that constitutes life. Indeed, every living organism is a 
constellation of contragrade processes, which continually hold local molecular orthograde processes 
at bay. 
Of course, the history of human technology involves the discovery of ways to utilize certain 
orthograde processes in order to drive desired contragrade processes. This is the general logic 
characterizing all the many types of machines that we employ to bend the world to our wishes. 
Reliably being able to produce unlikely outcomes, such as the purification of minerals, can provide 
the conditions for producing yet other, even more unlikely outcomes, such as the assembly of refined 
materials to form the circuits of my computer. But as we will see shortly, systems formed by stable 
contragrade processes can sometimes exhibit what amount to higher-order orthograde processes that 
are quite different than those from which they arise.