Knowledge Modelling for Establishment
of Common Ground in Dialogue Systems
Lina Varonina
Bielefeld University
Stefan Kopp"
Bielefeld University
The establishment and maintenance of common ground, i.e. mutual knowledge, beliefs and
assumptions, is important for dialogue systems in order to be seen as valid interlocutors in
both task-oriented and open-domain dialogue. It is therefore important to provide these systems
with knowledge models, so that their conversations could be grounded in the knowledge about
the relevant domain. Additionally, in order to facilitate understanding, dialogue systems should
be able to track the knowledge about the beliefs of the user and the level of their knowledgeability,
e.g., the assumptions that they hold or the extent to which a piece of knowledge has been accepted
by the user and can now be considered shared. This article provides a basic overview of current
research on knowledge modelling for the establishment of common ground in dialogue systems
The presented body of research is structured along three types of knowledge that can be integrated
into the system: (1) factual knowledge about the world, (2) personalised knowledge about the
user, (3) knowledge about user's knowledge and beliefs. Additionally, this article discusses the
presented body of research with regards to its relevance for the current state-of-the-art dialogue
systems and several ideal application scenarios that future research on knowledge modelling for
common ground establishment could aim for.
1. Introduction: Why do we need to model knowledge in dialogue systems?
When speaking about engaging in conversations with machines, most people would re-
fer to interactions with proprietary voice-based assistants (VA), such as Amazon Alexa,
Google Assistant, Siri, etc. Since their introduction to the market in the previous decade,
these systems have consistently been on the rise. According to a survey conducted in
the U.S. in 2020, more than a third of the adult population of the country possesses
a smart speaker (Kinsella 2020). Therefore, for many people experiences with these
voice-based assistants will influence their perception and expectations with regards to
language-based interactions with machines. However, despite recent advances in natu-
ral language processing (NLP) the capabilities of these wide-spread VAs to lead human-
like conversations are rather limited, resulting in a mismatch between expectations and
reality, which is especially prevalent among users with little technical knowledge who
cannot form adequate judgements about the capabilities of the system and rely on their
experiences from human-human communication when interacting with VAs (Luger and
Sellen 2016). Failure to engage with a voice-based assistant in a meaningful way can
cause users to change their communicative behaviour, e.g., by limiting their vocabulary Italian Journal of Computational Linguistics
Volume 7, Number 1-2
and 2016): simple The tasks simplifying that implications the utterances of users or such trust reducing the communicative the system to interactions failures perform with the
system to range of
correctly (Luger and Sellen
and lessons that can be learnt
from them for the design of conversational agents is one of the research topics of the
project IMPACT' (The implications of conversing with intelligent machines in everyday
life for people's beliefs about algorithms, their communication behaviour and their
relationship-building), a cooperation of various universities and disciplines that the
authors of this paper are a part of
t is interesting to note that some researchers reject the notion of classifying interac
tions with VAs as conversations due to their fundamental differences with actual human
conversations. Porcheron and colleagues (Porcheron et al. 2018) discussed this idea in
he context of the findings of their study on everyday use of voice-based assistants
in families. For instance, they argue that the predefined request-response format of
he interaction with VAs cannot be equated with interactively emerging adjacency
pairs, such as question-response, that serve as the basic organisational unit of many
of our everyday conversations. The responses of voice-based assistants sometimes fail
coherently follow the requests of their users, which is usually treated by the users
as incorrect output, rather than a reaction of an equal conversation partner. Overall,
he findings of the study suggest that smart devices with voice-based assistants are not
reated as interlocutors by family members, even though the interactions with them are
embedded in conversational situations within a family.
These differences in treatment were also seen in open-question interviews about the
nature of conversations conducted by Clark and colleagues (Clark et al. 2019). While the
interviewees acknowledged the importance of similar concepts in both human-human
and human-agent conversations, they operationalised them difterently, as conversations
with humans were characterised to have both social and transactional purposes, but
lescriptions of conversations with agents (which were influenced by interviewees' ex
periences with voice-based assistants) were mainly focused on the transactional aspect.
5o, for example, establishing common ground was identified as one of the most important
parts of a good conversation with other humans. However, in a human-agent setting the
interviewees rather preferred to speak about personalisation where certain information
s used by the system to tailor user experience, which, in a long-term perspective
could create an illusion of common ground between the human and the machine
he interviewees also did not view this process as co-constructed as they would the
establishment of common ground in human-human communication.
While it is not necessary to strive for the ideal of "human-like" conversation in every
lomain where conversational systems are used, in certain use cases, it is necessary to
endow these systems with qualities that would allow them to be increasingly treated
as valid conversation partners by humans (cf. (Kopp and Krämer 2021)). On the one
hand, these may be the use cases in which the social aspect of the conversation is of
importance, e.g., in social care or robot companionship. On the other hand, even in task-
oriented, primarily transactional interactions the inclusion of certain aspects of human-
uman conversation is needed: the one-shot request-response format of interactior
currently provided by the voice-based assistants is not sufficient. Clark and colleagues
Clark et al. 2019) offer an apt goal for task-oriented conversational systems: service
desk interactions between humans. In these types of conversations, the concepts 

