Hide browse barYour current position in the text is marked in blue. Click anywhere in the line to jump to another position:

text:

book:

chapter:

This text is part of:

Greek and Roman Materials

Search the Perseus Catalog for:

Editions/Translations

Author Group

View text chunked by:

text : book : chapter

Table of Contents:

￼ Arrian's Discourses of Epictetus

￼book 0

￼book 1

￼book 2

￼book 3

￼ Of finery in dress.

￼ In what a man ought to be exercised who has made proficiency; and that we neglect the chief things.

￼ What is the matter on which a good man should be employed, and in what we ought chiefly to practise ourselves.

￼ Against a person who showed his partizanship in an unseemly way in a theatre.

￼ Against those who on account of sickness go away home.

￼ Miscellaneous.

￼ To the administrator of the free cities who was an Epicurean.

￼ How we must exercise ourselves against appearances ( φαντασίας ).

￼ To a certain rhetorician who was going up to Rome on a suit.

￼ In what manner we ought to bear sickness.

￼ Certain miscellaneous matters

￼ About exercise.

￼ What solitude is, and what kind of person a solitary man is.

￼ Certain miscellaneous matters.

￼ That we ought to proceed with circumspection to every thing.

￼ That we ought with caution to enter into familiar intercourse with men.

￼ On Providence.

￼ That we ought not to be disturbed by any news.

￼ What is the condition of a common kind of man and of a philosopher.

￼ That we can derive advantage from all external things.

￼ Against those who readily come to the profession of sophists.

￼ About Cynism.

￼ To those who read and discuss for the sake of ostentation.

￼ That we ought not to be moved by a desire of those things which are not in our power.

￼ To those who fall off (desist) from their purpose.

￼ To those who fear want.

￼book 4

￼ The Encheiridion, or Manual.

￼ Fragments of Epictetus

￼

￼￼

Of finery in dress.

A CERTAIN young man a rhetorician came to see Epictetus, with his hair dressed more carefully than was usual and his attire in an ornamental style; whereupon Epictetus said, Tell me if you do not think that some dogs are beautiful and some horses, and so of all other animals. I do think so, the youth replied. Are not then some men also beautiful and others ugly? Certainly. Do we then for the same reason call each of them in the same kind beau- tiful, or each beautiful for something peculiar? And you will judge of this matter thus. Since we see a dog naturally formed for one thing, and a horse for another, and for another still, as an example, a nightingale, we may generally and not improperly declare each of them to be- beautiful then when it is most excellent according to its nature; but since the nature of each is different, each of them seems to me to be beautiful in a different way. Is it not so? He admitted that it was. That then which makes a dog beautiful, makes a horse ugly; and that which makes a horse beautiful, makes a dog ugly, if it is true that their natures are different. It seems to be so. For I think that what makes a Pancratiast beautiful, makes a. wrestler to be not good, and a runner to be most ridiculous; and he who is beautiful for the Pentathlon, is very ugly for wrestling.1 It is so said he. What then makes a man beautiful? Is it that which in its kind makes both a dog and a horse beautiful? It is, he said. What then makes a dog beautiful? The possession of the excellence of a dog. And what makes a horse beautiful? The possession of the excellence of a horse. What then makes a man beautiful? Is it not the possession of the excellence of a man? And do you then, if you wish to be beautiful, young man, labour at this, the acquisition of human excellence. But what is this? Observe whom you yourself praise, when you praise many persons without partiality: do you praise the just or the unjust? The just. Whether do you praise the moderate or the immoderate? The moderate. And the temperate or the intemperate? The temperate. If then you make yourself such a person, you will know that you will make yourself beautiful: but so long as you neglect these things, you must be ugly (αἰσχρόν) even though you contrive all you can to appear beautiful.

