1980-1990 CONTROL THEORY

Glasser’s search for a theoretical base for Reality Therapy took a huge step forward in the eighties when Sam Buchholtz, a friend of Dr. Glasser’s, encouraged him to read William Powers’ book ” Behavior: The Control Of Perception ” (1973) and, as he himself said, he found the key to much of what he had been looking for. Here were ideas that originated in engineering and were developed by a physics graduate to explain the links between perception and behaviour.

There was much in Powers’ Control Theory that resonated with Glasser’s thinking: Internal control; people’s reliance on perceptual phenomena rather than any absolute reality; the role of feedback loops in explaining human behaviour. The thermostat-like functioning of the brain to behave in order to reduce “perceptual discrepancy” would explain how people behaved in order to meet their needs. Glasser was very impressed, consulted with Powers and then put together his own understanding of Control Theory in “Stations of the Mind” (1981). Although Powers acknowledged that Glasser’s book did present his own ideas accurately, Glasser adapted these ideas to his own specialism and eventually would produce “Choice Theory” almost two decades later.

“Stations of the Mind” is Glasser’s most technical work but he now believes that the human brain does not work in such a complex way. Analysis of many different levels of perception, for example, was useful to the research-oriented Powers but Glasser no longer uses these in his work.

By 1984 he was ready to produce his own version of Powers’ ideas adapted to explain Reality Therapy. Although the book was called “Control Theory” it was already moving away from Powers’ original concepts and this book was to become a very important milestone in the development of Choice Theory. Rather than trying to explain someone else’s ideas, Glasser made them his own and then set about explaining his own new version.

https://wgii.ie/william-glasser/development-of-ideas/

