AI art presents a problem, I believe. I see all the same jealousy and unwritten rules being written into by the community. I think my painting style has been corrupted by the algorithms it might be adding another layer of political correctness that could be problematic.

I always had to walk the line of generating just enough business that I didn't get swamped with requests and easily typecast or pigeon holed, people always want the art style they saw or subject matter even if it was a completely one off piece. I don't know if it is my aphantasia but I don't have mental images so literally I usually have no inclination to paint until someone buys a piece or gives me a prompt.

I'm not sure I should paint what the market wants either else I could accidentally swamp the internet with pictures of cats in boxes.

If I had 22 million orders, for example. I'm not going to just make 22 million paintings on my own unless I am very sure of what I'm preaching, I want to become world famous unless there is some other artist who has done more. It would probably be a world record or something and would be notable even if the paintings were of nothing interesting.

This must be a self-imposed constraint, because I generated 27,000 painting ideas in a single session one time and have thousands of square feet of vinyl. I prefered to paint on wood or masonite but this would make it difficult to transport and weigh more. If I got a bulk order for 27,000 pieces, I could probably charge as little is a dollar or fifty cents a piece, even for for 2 x 3 foot vinyl. 

I try to make all my calculations based on not buying too much equipment or hiring a crew, although then I could easily charge whatever price I wanted. 

From my perspective, it is kind of like a batch processing operation, if I had 27,000 requests for the same painting that could lower the cost significantly, although it is not difficult not to ensure that each piece is original. Of course they would be hand painted, you can charge a lot more per square inch for pencil though, so you might want to keep this in mind.

I'm not sure if I can unilaterally decide to paint 22 million paintings, I will be accused of spamming, if nothing else. I literally stopped posting on Instagram I think I put out like 9 posts in a single day and I had complaints. This was a long time ago and maybe the Overton window has shifted but I would always have to keep a close watch how much other people are posting, if it's an order of magnitude over anyone else, it would attract international attention.

Maybe I'm just being paranoid, but literally I can't think of any strategy that doesn't involve my every motive being scrutinized.  