"If there is a preferred flow of information vertically through the cortex, one would expect to find different response characteristics in different cortical layers, since each stage of cortical processing is presumably contributing to the processing of information and thus transforming the neuronal response characteristics in some manner. Indeed, in general, receptive fields tend to be larger and responses tend to be more complex outside of L-IV. Experiments in rat and monkey somatosensory cortex indicate that the smallest receptive fields are found in L-IV, while supragranular layers exhibit larger receptive fields than those observed in L-IV, and infragranular layers exhibit the largest receptive fields (Simons 1978, Chapin 1986, Armstrong-James & Fox 1987) or sizes equivalent to those in the supragranular layers (Sur et al 1985). Laminar analysis in cat visual cortex indicates similar patterns. Gilbert (1977) reported that the smallest receptive fields were in L-IV, intermediate size fields were inL-III, and the largest receptive fields were in the infragranular layers. Other interlaminar differences include the observation that the degree of orientation tuning is also sharper in the supra- and infragranular layers (Chapman&Stryker 1993) and that the proportion of simple cells in the visual cortex is highest in L-IV, whereas complex cells are found mostly in supra- and infragranular layers (Hubel & Wiesel 1968, Gilbert 1977). Together these data support the notion that at each level of cortical processing, the neurons are sampling from a larger input space, receiving convergent information from the previous level, diverging out to the next level, and in the process, forming larger and more complexly integrated and combinatorial receptive fields.

In addition to the vertical flow of information, there is substantial horizontal interconnectivity, which integrates information from neighboring regions and from specific, more distant cortical zones (Lorente de N´o 1938). Excitatory horizontal projections arise mainly from L-II/III and L-V pyramidal cells and project preferentially to supra- and infragranular layers (e.g. Schwark & Jones 1989, White 1989, Abeles 1991, Tanifuji et al 1994). For any given layer, it is not clear what percentage of synapses originate from within the same cortical column, from more distant cortical regions, or from other cortical fields. However, even in L-IV, only 15–20% of the synapses are of thalamic origin (LeVay & Gilbert 1976, Benshalom & White 1986); most synapses seem to originate from intra- and interlaminar neurons. Horizontal connectivity may be of particular relevance in cortical map reorganization, since it appears that areas that develop novel receptive fields and other emergent response properties after peripheral input manipulations may rely in large part on connections from neighboring cortical sectors..." [Abstract] [PDF]

[Abstract] [PDF]

Biology Online: Regulation in Biological Systems

Hahnloser RH, Douglas RJ, Hepp K.
Attentional recruitment of inter-areal recurrent networks for selective gain control.
Neural Comput 2002 Jul;14(7):1669-89
"There is strong anatomical and physiological evidence that neurons with large receptive fields located in higher visual areas are recurrently connected to neurons with smaller receptive fields in lower areas. We have previously described a minimal neuronal network architecture in which top-down attentional signals to large receptive field neurons can bias and selectively read out the bottom-up sensory information to small receptive field neurons (Hahnloser, Douglas, Mahowald, & Hepp, 1999). Here we study an enhanced model, where the role of attention is to recruit specific inter-areal feedback loops (e.g., drive neurons above firing threshold). We first illustrate the operation of recruitment on a simple example of visual stimulus selection. In the subsequent analysis, we find that attentional recruitment operates by dynamical modulation of signal amplification and response multistability. In particular, we find that attentional stimulus selection necessitates increased recruitment when the stimulus to be selected is of small contrast and of small distance away from distractor stimuli. The selectability of a low-contrast stimulus is dependent on the gain of attentional effects; for example, low-contrast stimuli can be selected only when attention enhances neural responses. However, the dependence of attentional selection on stimulus-distractor distance is not contingent on whether attention enhances or suppresses responses. The computational implications of attentional recruitment are that cortical circuits can behave as winner-take-all mechanisms of variable strength and can achieve close to optimal signal discrimination in the presence of external noise." [Abstract] [PDF]

Burrone J, Murthy VN.
Synaptic gain control and homeostasis.
Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2003 Oct;13(5):560-7.
"Chronic changes in activity can induce neurons to alter the strength of all their synapses in unison. Although the specific changes that occur appear to vary depending on the experimental preparation, their net effect is to counter the experimentally induced modification of activity. Such adaptive, cell-wide changes in synaptic strength serve to stabilize neuronal activity and are collectively referred to as homeostatic synaptic plasticity. Recent studies have shed light on what triggers homeostatic synaptic plasticity, whether or not it is distinct from other forms of synaptic plasticity and whether or not it occurs in the intact brain." [Abstract] [PDF]

Davis GW, Bezprozvanny I.
Maintaining the stability of neural function: a homeostatic hypothesis.
Annu Rev Physiol. 2001;63:847-69.
"The precise regulation of neural excitability is essential for proper nerve cell, neural circuit, and nervous system function. During postembryonic development and throughout life, neurons are challenged with perturbations that can alter excitability, including changes in cell size, innervation, and synaptic input. Numerous experiments demonstrate that neurons are able to compensate for these types of perturbation and maintain appropriate levels of excitation. The mechanisms of compensation are diverse, including regulated changes to synaptic size, synaptic strength, and ion channel function in the plasma membrane. These data are evidence for homeostatic regulatory systems that control neural excitability. A model of neural homeostasis suggests that information about cell activity, cell size, and innervation is fed into a system of cellular monitors. Intracellular- and intercellular-signaling systems transduce this information into regulated changes in synaptic and ion channel function. This review discusses evidence for such a model of homeostatic regulation in the nervous system." [Abstract]

Abbott LF, Varela JA, Sen K, Nelson SB.
Synaptic depression and cortical gain control.
Science. 1997 Jan 10;275(5297):220-4.
"Cortical neurons receive synaptic inputs from thousands of afferents that fire action potentials at rates ranging from less than 1 hertz to more than 200 hertz. Both the number of afferents and their large dynamic range can mask changes in the spatial and temporal pattern of synaptic activity, limiting the ability of a cortical neuron to respond to its inputs. Modeling work based on experimental measurements indicates that short-term depression of intracortical synapses provides a dynamic gain-control mechanism that allows equal percentage rate changes on rapidly and slowly firing afferents to produce equal postsynaptic responses. Unlike inhibitory and adaptive mechanisms that reduce responsiveness to all inputs, synaptic depression is input-specific, leading to a dramatic increase in the sensitivity of a neuron to subtle changes in the firing patterns of its afferents." [Abstract]

Koch C, Segev I.
The role of single neurons in information processing.
Nat Neurosci. 2000 Nov;3 Suppl:1171-7.
"Neurons carry out the many operations that extract meaningful information from sensory receptor arrays at the organism's periphery and translate these into action, imagery and memory. Within today's dominant computational paradigm, these operations, involving synapses, membrane ionic channels and changes in membrane potential, are thought of as steps in an algorithm or as computations. The role of neurons in these computations has evolved conceptually from that of a simple integrator of synaptic inputs until a threshold is reached and an output pulse is initiated, to a much more sophisticated processor with mixed analog-digital logic and highly adaptive synaptic elements." [Abstract] [PDF]

Rainer G, Asaad WF, Miller EK.
Selective representation of relevant information by neurons in the primate prefrontal cortex.
Nature 1998 Jun 11;393(6685):577-9
"The severe limitation of the capacity of working memory, the ability to store temporarily and manipulate information, necessitates mechanisms that restrict access to it. Here we report tests to discover whether the activity of neurons in the prefrontal (PF) cortex, the putative neural correlate of working memory, might reflect these mechanisms and preferentially represent behaviourally relevant information. Monkeys performed a 'delayed-matching-to-sample' task with an array of three objects. Only one of the objects in the array was relevant for task performance and the monkeys needed to find that object (the target) and remember its location. For many PF neurons, activity to physically identical arrays varied with the target location; the location of the non-target objects had little or no influence on activity. Information about the target location was present in activity as early as 140ms after array onset. Also, information about which object was the target was reflected in the sustained activity of many PF neurons. These results suggest that the prefrontal cortex is involved in selecting and maintaining behaviourally relevant information." [Abstract]

Mao A, Freeman KA, Tallarida RJ.
Transient loss of dopamine autoreceptor control in the presence of highly potent dopamine agonists.
Life Sci 1996;59(21):PL317-24
"The concentrations of endogenous ligands generally remain in a bounded range around a basal level, a manifestation of control. The dopaminergic system is an excellent example of a control system in which a negative feedback signal is associated with receptor occupancy of a D2-like dopamine autoreceptor. A consequence of the control theory is that autoreceptor occupancy by an agonist results in dopamine levels below the basal, whereas similar stimulation by a dopamine competitive antagonist results in an increase of dopamine to levels above the basal. These consequences of control theory were tested and verified in the rat striatum by infusing graded doses of either the agonist, quinpirole, or the antagonist, sulpiride, into the rat striatum via a microdialysis probe and sampling dopamine and metabolite levels at various times after the start of infusion. Control was maintained even at the very highest doses of these compounds, i.e., striatal dopamine concentration rose in response to the antagonist and fell in response to the agonist. In contrast, administration of each of two high affinity dopamine agonists, 7-OH-DPAT and PPHT showed dose-dependent control only up to certain doses. Above these doses the dopamine concentration actually increased to levels well above basal, an indication of loss of control. These findings suggest that the control of this endogenous ligand does not extend to the very highest levels of autoreceptor occupancy." [Abstract]

Durstewitz, Daniel, Kelc, Marian, Gunturkun, Onur
A Neurocomputational Theory of the Dopaminergic Modulation of Working Memory Functions
J. Neurosci. 1999 19: 2807-2822
"The dopaminergic modulation of neural activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is essential for working memory. Delay-activity in the PFC in working memory tasks persists even if interfering stimuli intervene between the presentation of the sample and the target stimulus. Here, the hypothesis is put forward that the functional role of dopamine in working memory processing is to stabilize active neural representations in the PFC network and thereby to protect goal-related delay-activity against interfering stimuli. To test this hypothesis, we examined the reported dopamine-induced changes in several biophysical properties of PFC neurons to determine whether they could fulfill this function. An attractor network model consisting of model neurons was devised in which the empirically observed effects of dopamine on synaptic and voltage-gated membrane conductances could be represented in a biophysically realistic manner. In the model, the dopamine-induced enhancement of the persistent Na+ and reduction of the slowly inactivating K+ current increased firing of the delay-active neurons, thereby increasing inhibitory feedback and thus reducing activity of the "background" neurons. Furthermore, the dopamine-induced reduction of EPSP sizes and a dendritic Ca2+ current diminished the impact of intervening stimuli on current network activity. In this manner, dopaminergic effects indeed acted to stabilize current delay-activity. Working memory deficits observed after supranormal D1-receptor stimulation could also be explained within this framework. Thus, the model offers a mechanistic explanation for the behavioral deficits observed after blockade or after supranormal stimulation of dopamine receptors in the PFC and, in addition, makes some specific empirical predictions." [Full Text]

Le Bars, Daniel, Gozariu, Manuela, Cadden, Samuel W.
Animal Models of Nociception
Pharmacol Rev 2001 53: 597-652
"Sensory systems have the role of informing the brain about the state of the external environment and the internal milieu of the organism. Pain is a perception, and as such, it is one of the outputs of a system in more highly evolved animals -- the nociceptive system -- which itself is a component of the overall set of controls responsible for homeostasis." [Full Text]

Melzack R.
From the gate to the neuromatrix.
Pain 1999 Aug;Suppl 6:S121-6
"The gate control theory's most important contribution to understanding pain was its emphasis on central neural mechanisms. The theory forced the medical and biological sciences to accept the brain as an active system that filters, selects and modulates inputs. The dorsal horns, too, were not merely passive transmission stations but sites at which dynamic activities (inhibition, excitation and modulation) occurred. The great challenge ahead of us is to understand brain function. I have therefore proposed that the brain possesses a neural network--the body-self neuromatrix--which integrates multiple inputs to produce the output pattern that evokes pain. The body-self neuromatrix comprises a widely distributed neural network that includes parallel somatosensory, limbic and thalamocortical components that subserve the sensory-discriminative. affective-motivational and evaluative-cognitive dimensions of pain experience. The synaptic architecture of the neuromatrix is determined by genetic and sensory influences. The 'neurosignature' output of the neuromatrix--patterns of nerve impulses of varying temporal and spatial dimensions--is produced by neural programs genetically build into the neuromatrix and determines the particular qualities and other properties of the pain experience and behavior. Multiple inputs that act on the neuromatrix programs and contribute to the output neurosignature include. (1) sensory inputs (cutaneous, visceral and other somatic receptors); (2) visual and other sensory inputs that influence the cognitive interpretation of the situation; (3) phasic and tonic cognitive and emotional inputs from other areas of the brain; (4) intrinsic neural inhibitory modulation inherent in all brain function; (5) the activity of the body's stress-regulation systems, including cytokines as well as the endocrine, autonomic, immune and opioid systems. We have traveled a long way from the psychophysical concept that seeks a simple one-to-one relationship between injury and pain. We now have a theoretical framework in which a genetically determined template for the body-self is modulated by the powerful stress system and the cognitive functions of the brain, in addition to the traditional sensory inputs." [Abstract]

Reichling DB, Levine JD.
The primary afferent nociceptor as pattern generator.
Pain 1999 Aug;Suppl 6:S103-9
"One of the most important advances in our understanding of the pain experience was the introduction of the 'gate control' theory which stimulated analysis of activity pattern in nociceptive pathways and its modulation. Advances in cellular and molecular biology have recently begun to provide detailed information on the mechanisms of stimulus transduction within primary afferent nociceptors as well as mechanisms that modulate the transduction process. From these new insights into the sensory physiology of the nociceptive nerve ending emerges a concept of the primary afferent as the first site of pattern generation in the nociceptive pathway, in which dynamic tuning of gain in the mosaic of inputs to individual primary afferents occurs. The electrical properties of the nociceptor membrane that converts the generator potential to a pattern of action potentials is also actively adjusted." [Abstract]

Kobayashi S.
Warm- and cold-sensitive neurons inactive at normal core temperature in rat hypothalamic slices.
Brain Res 1986 Jan 1;362(1):132-9
"Electrical activities of thermosensitive neurons were recorded extracellularly in slices of rat preoptic area and anterior hypothalamus. Of 63 spontaneously firing neurons found at high searching temperature (37-40 degrees C), 33% were warm-sensitive, 8% were cold-sensitive and the remaining 59% were thermally insensitive. In particular, 6 warm-sensitive neurons were active only above 38 degrees C of rat normal core temperature. In contrast, of 38 spontaneously firing neurons found at low searching temperature (32-36 degrees C), 8% were warm-sensitive, 29% were cold-sensitive and the remaining 63% were thermally insensitive. Furthermore, all these cold-sensitive neurons were active only below 38 degrees C. Therefore, the warm- and cold-sensitive neurons active at 38 degrees C would be functioning for narrow band control and the remaining warm- and cold-sensitive neurons inactive at 38 degrees C would be recruited for wide band control when core temperature was changed critically from 38 degrees C. Their firing rate activities often showed obvious threshold responses, large hysteresis of the threshold responses and remarkable transient responses to slice temperature changes. From aspects of automatic control theory, these warm- and cold-sensitive neurons themselves may be thermostats to regulate the brain temperature rather than thermosensors to monitor it." [Abstract]

Sun JR, Ma YC, Xu ZH, Zhao WJ, Cai YP.
[Effect of norepinephrine on the thermosensitive neurons in preoptic area of hypothalamus tissue slices in cold acclimatized rats]
Sheng Li Xue Bao 1997 Dec;49(6):666-70
"In this work, single unit firing activities were recorded in the preoptic anterior hypothalamus (POAH) brain slices of cold acclimatized and room-temperature housed rats (CR and RR) and the effects of NE on the neuronal discharges were observed. The neurons of POAH in CR became much more sensitive to NE than that in RR (the threshold concentration of NE of CR became significantly lowered). In comparison with RR, the percentage of warm sensitive neurons that could be excited by NE was decreased and some of them even showed inhibitory responses. On the other hand, the percentage of cold sensitive neurons that could be inhibited by NE was decreased and some of them even showed excitatory responses. The percentage of thermo-insensitive neurons that could be either excited or inhibited by NE were increased." [Abstract]

Meyer-Lindenberg A, Ziemann U, Hajak G, Cohen L, Berman KF.
Transitions between dynamical states of differing stability in the human brain.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 Aug 20;99(17):10948-53
"What mechanisms underlie the flexible formation, adaptation, synchronization, and dissolution of large-scale neural assemblies from the 10(10) densely interconnected, continuously active neurons of the human brain? Nonlinear dynamics provides a unifying perspective on self-organization. It shows that the emergence of patterns in open, nonequilibrium systems is governed by their stability in response to small disturbances and predicts macroscopic transitions between patterns of differing stability. Here, we directly demonstrate that such transitions can be elicited in the human brain by interference at the neural level. As a probe, we used a classic motor coordination paradigm exhibiting well described movement states of differing stability. Functional neuroimaging identified premotor (PMA) and supplementary motor (SMA) cortices as having neural activity linked to the degree of behavioral instability. These regions then were transiently disturbed with graded transcranial magnetic stimulation, which caused sustained and macroscopic behavioral transitions from the less stable out-of-phase to the stable in-phase movement, whereas the stable pattern could not be affected. Moreover, the strength of the disturbance needed (a measure of neural stability) was linked to the degree of behavioral stability, demonstrating the applicability of nonlinear system theory as a powerful predictor of the dynamical repertoire of the human brain." [Abstract]

Abe H.
Nutrition and control theory.
J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo) 1991 Dec;37 Suppl:S5-12
"Organ homeostasis in humans is maintained by the "auto-regulatory system." Although this biological regulatory system is regarded as complicated and difficult to analyze, with the aid of control theory it has become possible for us to construct a mathematical model. To date we have created models for water-electrolyte balance and glucose metabolism. The validity of these models has been evaluated by simulation study. As a clinical application of the model, we have successfully developed an artificial pancreas system for the treatment of diabetic patients. Through this system, we have made many contributions to the study of clinical nutrition and we feel that this has initiated a new era in this field. In order to make further progress in this field, it will be necessary to take a new dynamic and systemic approach." [Abstract]

Peters A, Schweiger U, Fruhwald-Schultes B, Born J, Fehm HL.
The neuroendocrine control of glucose allocation.
Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2002 Jul;110(5):199-211
"Summary. Here we propose that glucose metabolism can be understood on the basis of three concept-derived axioms: (I) A hierarchy exists among the glucose-utilizing organs with the brain served first, followed by muscle and fat. (II) Tissue-specific glucose transporters allocate glucose among organs in order to maintain brain glucose concentrations. (III) Exogenous carbohydrate supply compensates for glucose alterations that can temporarily occur in muscle and fat. Derived from the control theory, the simplest solution of allocating supply to 2 organs, e.g. brain and muscle, is a "fishbone"-structured model. We reviewed the literature, searching for neuroendocrine and metabolic mechanisms that can fulfill control functions in such a model: The tissue-specific glucose transporters are differentially regulated. GLUT 1, carrying glucose across the blood-brain-barrier, is independent of insulin. Instead, this trans-endothelial glucose transporter is rather dependent on potent regulators of blood vessel function like vascular endothelial growth factor - a pituitary counterregulatory hormone. GLUT 4, carrying glucose across the membranes of muscle and fat cells, depends on insulin. Thereby, insulin allocates glucose to muscle and fat. The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), and vascular endothelial growth factor allocate glucose to the brain. Multiple "sensors" (some of which have only recently been identified as ATP sensitive potassium channels) measure glucose or glucose equivalents at various sites of the body: the ventromedial hypothalamus, the lateral hypothalamus, portal vein, pancreatic beta cell, renal tubule, muscle and adipose tissue. Feedback pathways both from the brain and from muscle and fat are involved in regulating glucose allocation and exogenous glucose supply. The main feedback signal from the brain is found to be glucose, that from muscle and fat appears to be leptin. In fact, the literature search revealed two or more biological mechanisms for the function of each component in the model, finding glucose regulation highly redundant. This review focuses on "brain glucose" control. The concept of glucose allocation presented here challenges the common opinion of "blood glucose" being the main parameter controlled. According to the latter opinion, hyperglycemia in the metabolic syndrome is due to a putative defect located within the closed loop including the beta cell, muscle and fat cells. That traditional view leaves some peculiarities of e.g. the metabolic syndrome unexplained. The concept of glucose allocation, however, would predict that weight gain - with abundance of glucose in muscle and fat - increases feedback to the brain (via hyperleptinemia) which in turn results in HPA-axis and SNS overdrive, impaired insulin secretion, and insulin resistance. HPA-axis overdrive would account for metabolic abnormalities such as central adiposity, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, and hypertension, that are well known clinical aspects the metabolic syndrome. This novel viewpoint of "brain glucose" control may shed new light on the pathogenesis of the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes." [Abstract]

Heap RB, Galil AK, Harrison FA, Jenkin G, Perry JS.
Progesterone and oestrogen in pregnancy and parturition: comparative aspects and hierarchical control.
Ciba Found Symp 1977;(47):127-57
"The different ways in which the progesterone requirements of pregnancy are met in various species are reviewed here. Progesterone production expressed in terms of metabolic body weight lies within about one order of magnitude in several species (but not in the rat), whether the hormone is predominantly ovarian or placental in origin. Parturition is usually preceded by a decrease in the plasma concentration of progesterone and the evidence which suggests that a decrease in secretion involves enzyme induction is summarized. In the sheep a sequence of well-marked hormonal changes can be discerned--an increase in fetal cortisol secretion followed by a fall in placental progesterone and a rise in oestrogen and prostaglandin F2alpha secretion. This sequence has been interpreted in terms of hierarchical control theory which envisages a series of levels placed in a descending order of importance and in which there is a downward transmission of a signal from a higher level that modifies activity at a lower level. A dominant level in the hierarchy in the sheep and pig seems to be the fetal hypothalamus and pituitary, but in the rabbit the maternal hypothalamus, pituitary and ovary play a more dominant role." [Abstract]

Gerald M. Edelman, and Joseph A. Gally
Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems
PNAS 98: 13763-13768; published online before print as 10.1073/pnas.231499798
"Degeneracy, the ability of elements that are structurally different to perform the same function or yield the same output, is a well known characteristic of the genetic code and immune systems. Here, we point out that degeneracy is a ubiquitous biological property and argue that it is a feature of complexity at genetic, cellular, system, and population levels. Furthermore, it is both necessary for, and an inevitable outcome of, natural selection." [Full Text]
