On the Compresence of Tropes

Arda Denkel

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research

Vol. 57, No. 3 (Sep., 1997), pp. 599-606 (8 pages)

Published By: International Phenomenological Society


Abstract

Once we assume that objects are bundles of tropes, we want to know how the latter cohere. Are they held together by a substratum, are they linked by external relations or do they cling to one another by internal relations? This paper begins by exploring the reasons for eliminating the first two suggestions. Defending that the third option can be made plausible, it advances the following thesis: Maintaining that tropes are held in a compresence by appropriately qualified internal relations avoids the consequence that such properties will be essential to the object. The specific targets of the second part of the paper include, first, a more precise description of the notion of a cohesive internal relation, and second, an explanation of how alteration is possible in an object the particular properties of which hold together by qualified internal relations


1) Theories of Cohesion. Once we assume that substances are (at least) comp-
resences of particular properties (or "tropes"), we become liable to the ques-
tion "How do properties hold together (or "'cohere") in bundles?" In an inter-
esting paper,' Peter Simons discusses a number of alternative answers to this
question. First, he considers attempts to explain the cohesion of the elements
of a compresence by external relations, and criticizes them mainly for the im-
plausibly large number of such relations they entail. He also rejects the ex-
planation of concrete bundles which views properties bonded to particular po-
sitions: The latter type of account reveals its implausibility when we take
motion into account. How, on such a view, can the same substance, and
hence the same tropes in the same bundle, be said to change position? A third
explanation of cohesion hypothesizes a substratum bearing the tropes and
lending them unity within a single concrete entity. Simons' objection is that
such bare particulars are "...inconsistent in that it is essential to them that
they have no properties ..essentially, and essential that they be not in more
than one substance at once".2
Let us note here that there exist yet other reasons for rejecting theories of
cohesion that appeal to external bonds between tropes, whether or not they
also appeal to substrata: For example any such view is bothered by some
"Particulars in Particular Clothing: Three Trope Theories of Substance", Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 54 (1994), pp. 553-75.
P. 566.

