

A review on climate change and its impact on agriculture ...

￼

ResearchGate

https://www.researchgate.net › ... › Climate Change

... in agricultural and ecological droughts and conﬁdence in human contributions to observed. changes in diﬀerent regions of the world. Source - IPCC AR6, 2021. 2.


Federalism and the Tug of War Within - Page 167 - Google Books Result

google.ca

https://books.google.ca › books

Erin Ryan · 2011 · ‎Law

... confidence” in human contributions to climate change through the emission of carbon dioxide and other gases that trap heat in the atmosphere.134 The ...


The effects of climate change on the global and regional ...

NWP-IMD

https://nwp.imd.gov.in › IWM-7 › pdf

PDF

Australia since 1970s Low confidence in human contributions. Page 7. • “Near-term changes in global monsoon precipitation and circulation will be affected by ...

20 pages


5 The Interjurisdictional Gray Area - Oxford Academic

￼

Oxford Academic

https://academic.oup.com › book › chapter

... confidence” in human contributions to climate change through the emission of carbon dioxide and other gases that trap heat in the atmosphere.134 The ...

The Confidence Information Ontology: a step towards a … - ‎Bastian - Cited by 43

… : Crowdsourcing ontology alignment with microtasks - ‎Sarasua - Cited by 226

… confidence of protein interactions using Gene Ontology - ‎Paul - Cited by 7


The Confidence Information Ontology: a step towards a ...

￼

National Institutes of Health (.gov)

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov › articles › PMC4425939

by FB Bastian · 2015 · Cited by 43 — This ontology was created to address the main points identified to provide clear and meaningful information about confidence in annotations.

People also ask

What are the 4 types of ontology?

What is an ontological perspective?

What is difference between ontology and epistemology?

What is an example of an ontology?

Feedback


Using ontologies to enhance human understandability of ...

￼

ScienceDirect

https://www.sciencedirect.com › science › article › pii

by R Confalonieri · 2021 · Cited by 75 — In ontologies, the information content can be computed either extrinsically from the concept occurrences (e.g., [54]), or intrinsically, according to the number ...


A guide to ontology, epistemology, and philosophical ...

￼

Integration and Implementation Insights

https://i2insights.org › philosophy-for-interdisciplinarity

May 2, 2017 — Ontology helps researchers recognize how certain they can be about the nature and existence of objects they are researching.

Missing: Confidence ‎| Show results with: Confidence


Typology of Ontological Insecurity Mechanisms: Russia's ...

￼

Oxford Academic

https://academic.oup.com › isr › article › viad016

by H von Essen · 2023 · Cited by 1 — According to Giddens, ontological security “refers to the confidence that most human beings have in the continuity of their self-identity and in ...


The Curation of Neurodegeneration Supporting Ontology

￼

Biopragmatics

https://cthoyt.com › 2020/06/09 › conso

Jun 9, 2020 — The first criterion for high confidence was that they were either in a

