If only I cared more about things like money and my career. I seem to have a very lackadaisical attitude about success.

I used to think that I was doing everything to prepare for raising a family prepare for a career.

I am not sure I have had very good luck with girls, my wife turned out very toxic and had some very dangerous and destructive behaviours. I couldn't even talk about it with her, because I think she would have taken her own life if she knew how horrible she treated me. It kind of grosses me out that people kept hanging out with her.

I am totally an atheist, but any time I am mistreated I just ignore it, let them blame me if they want, like I know it's some how based on some turn the other cheek philosophy, which is probably a good long term strategy, but it seems like squeaky wheels, manipulating people, and people willing to rip people off have a lot more success.

I don't know if I've painted myself into a corner or something, I really feel like I am happy no matter what happens, and this is infuriating to people, a lot of people treat me like I am some kind of autistic child or some kind of dumb idiot.

I don't even know how it is even possible, it is usually because I can do all kinds of things extremely easily that they find difficult or impossible.

They must believe in idiot savants or something, but to them they treat me like an alien intelligence.

I struggle to imagine how I would even be able to think or do stuff if I wasn't moral or understand social relationships. My extreme patience with people is seen as a deficit and a flaw.

I can't help but thinking that if I was more well-known these effects would be amplified.

Like if I have so little success convincing people I have good intentions, I can't imagine  what it would be like with strangers who never met me.

I don't expect that you have any answers, but I sometimes think there must be something more productive I could be doing with my time. 

People's reaction to AI art is extremely polarized, it seems incomprehensible to me. I am pretty sure I cannot say things I think very publically. Of course I don't think AI is dangerous, but people are dangerous.

Why should I help them?

When it seems that they fight being helped.