Self-organizing Systems 
Scientists working with bionic computers are hopeful that 
these strange thinking machines may help break the program- 
ming bottleneck. Each step a present -day computer is to 
take must be outlined in detail before the machine can 
function. It frequently takes months of human time to pro- 
a left. The mouse, equipped with red and green sensors, 
won't be instructed- programmed, in computer language -to 
pay attention to the lights. But, like a live mouse, it will 
see them. If predictions hold, the mouse without being told 
will figure out for itself that red means left and green right. 
Then, when placed in a new maze equipped with lights, it 
should run it properly the first time. 
Bright Bionic Future 
A bionic brain might eventually begin to perform feats 
now completely out of the question for non -living systems, 
indeed, might display true intelligence. Pattern recognition, 
for example, is a field now in its infancy. A few machines 
have been built which can read several handwritten numbers 
or letters if they're written clearly enough. But human beings 
recognize with ease patterns of astonishing complexity. A 
child who can't add 2 -t- 2, for example, can recognize hun- 
dreds of different people at a glance, by differentiating be- 
tween the subtle changes in the patterns of their faces. 
Elementary self -organizing pattern recognizing systems 
called "Perceptrons" have already been built at Cornell and 
other places. So far, they work, but do well to recognize 
simple letters. But what scientists learn from these early 
machines may help them build more versatile devices in the 
future. 
A highly sophisticated pattern recognizer would certainly 
program a computer to solve a problem which it can complete 
in a few minutes. 
Man, animals -and now bionic computers, such as the one 
which guides the mouse -on the other hand, fall into a cat- 
egory labeled "self- organizing data -processing systems." One 
man can tell another to make out a payroll, and no further 
instructions are necessary. Man, in other words, is self -pro- 
gramming. He operates on general instructions, filling in de- 
tails for himself. But a computer has to be instructed on 
each minute step: read certain names and amounts from the 
memory, compute certain figures, etc. 
Bionic computers are, to some extent, already self- program- 
ming. The mouse doesn't have to be programmed to run the 
maze -it figures out the process for itself. Furthermore, if 
the maze is changed, it sets to work and learns the new 
maze -again without being told. 
A new mouse -one with 40 neurons -is now being built and 
should be capable of even more complex behavior. In one 
experiment, Air Force scientists plan to put red and green 
lights on either side of the passageway. A green light will 
shine where a right turn should be made; red will indicate 
March, 1963 
be a useful device. In a satellite, it could look at clouds, 
spot important patterns and notify the ground station, ignore 
everything else. A spy -in- the -sky could look out for missile 
launchings, also for troop movements, armament buildups, 
or other tell -tale signs. It could look at microphotographs 
of blood samples and tissue sections and make diagnostic 
decisions. (MIT already has a working model of one such 
device which can recognize a certain type of cancer cell 
by looking at it through a microscope. ) 
Bionic brains, of course, wouldn't have abilities such as 
these the moment they rolled off the assembly line. Unlike 
ordinary computers which are ready to work as soon as the 
last soldered connection cools, bionic computers would have 
to learn their jobs. One Air Force scientist estimates that 
a newly completed brain might sit on the shelf for a year 
or more, soaking up information poured into it 24 hours 
a day. Its "education" received in this way would be com- 
parable in some respects to the education of a human being. 
Learning ability isn't the only benefit we may get from 
designing bionic computers to imitate living brains. Another 
is reliability. You were born with some 10 billion neurons-

In the early 1950's, the need for computer systems orders 
of magnitude better than those then in existence became ob- 
vious. So scientists, while continuing to improve conven- 
tional computers as rapidly as possible, also began to look 
around for new approaches to data processing. They found 
one clue in the oldest data handling system in existence: 
the brain. Scientists around the country set to work to 
wrest useful secrets locked in the brain cells of animals 
and men.

In 1960 the Air Force called a con- 
ference, coined the term "bionics" to de- 
scribe what the meeting would be about. 
(The word doesn't come from a combi- 
nation of biology and electronics as has 
been frequently reported, but from the 
Greek word "bion," which means "unit 
of life. ") To everyone's surprise, more 
than 700 scientists showed up, pre- 
sented dozens of papers reporting on 
work they had done. 
Bionic Pilots 
Intensive investigation has been un- 
derway in scores of company and uni- 
versity laboratories ever since. The Air 
Force is particularly interested in the 
field, hopes eventually to have such ad- 
vanced devices as bionic pilots. "Air- 
planes," said one officer, "are getting too 
fast and too complicated for men to 
handle. If two 1500 -mph jets come out 
of clouds 10 miles apart on collision 
course, they'll smash into each other 
before the pilots have a chance to react 
and change course." 
The effectiveness of a future bionic 
pilot was demonstrated in an experiment 
performed by Melpar under an Air Force 
contract. During major overhauls, the 
ailerons of an airplane are sometimes 
wired up backwards. When the pilot 
takes off and a wing dips, he automat- 
ically tries to correct it. But with the 
mis -wired aileron, his action makes the 
dip worse instead of correcting it. "I've 
never known a pilot to fly out of such 
a situation alive," said one observer. 
Melpar simulated the same situation 
on a computer, found that a bionic brain 
would react so fast that it would realize 
what was wrong and retrain itself to ap- 
ply the proper kind of corrective action 
before a dangerous situation could de- 
velop. 
Bionic brains, if they live up to prom- 
ise, seem perfectly suited for thousands 
of jobs where the ability to assimilate 
volumes of information, sift out the rele- 
vant, and make logical decisions, is im- 
portant. Weather forecasting, language 
translation, predicting business trends: 
all are possible examples. 
No Unanimity 
As is usually the case in areas of new 
discovery, opinions of leaders in the field 
are sharply divided as to the possible 
future benefits to be gained from bionic 
computing devices. L. D. Harmon of Bell 
Labs, who has done much of the trail- 
blazing work in artificial neurons, feels 
that in general predictions tend to take 
too rosy a view. Living brain systems, 
says Harmon, are so complex that we 
may never be able to understand them 
completely -let alone build machines to 
imitate them. What is needed now is a
more basic knowledge of such dimly 
understood attributes as thought, intel- 
ligence, and reasoning ability. 
Dr. Arthur Samuel of IBM tends to 
agree that although some progress may 
come out of bionic research, probably 
the best way to advance toward machine 
intelligence is to delve more deeply into 
the basic mechanism of thought. "To call 
to mind a rather trite analogy," he says, 
"when man first attempted to fly, he 
studied the birds, and the early, unsuc- 
cessful flying machines were mechanical 
birds. It was not until man stopped 
studying birds and began to study aero- 
dynamics that much progress was made. 
The modern jet airplane," he continues, 
"must cope with the same aerodynam- 
ical problems with which birds contend, 
but the mechanisms used in the solution 
of the problem of flight are quite dif- 
ferent." 
Dr. Samuel believes that if and when 
man really understands what thought is, 
he'll probably be able to build machines 
or even program conventional comput- 
ers to think. Further, the process may 
imitate the precise functions of the brain 
about as accurately as a Boeing 707 imitates a seagull. Fastest progress, he feels, will probably come from research aimed at basic understanding of thought processes and intelligence, rather than from 
attempts to imitate the brain.


At the same time, Samuel and many 
others who take the same general view, 
believe that no promising approach to 
the problem should be neglected, and 
that the field of bionics, particularly in 
view of its early accomplishments, is a 
worthwhile line of investigation. 
Others are more enthusiastic. Gordon 
Pask, for example, of System Research, 
Ltd. of Richmond, England, envisions 
future bionic brains in almost human 
terms. "A biological computer would be 
capable of elaborating concepts we 
could understand. We might argue with 
it and lead it to modify its attitude. I 
intend these remarks," he added for 
skeptics, "quite literally." 
Even the fact that little actual bionic 
computing hardware now exists doesn't dampen the enthusiasm of some bionic voosters. "Bionics," said former RCA President John H. Burns, summing up 
his feelings with no equivocation, "holds more promise for human benefit than any temporal force at work in our civilization today."