My business: To eliminate advertisement, workshops, marketing, ponzi schemes, and money AND replace it with a resource- and intelligence-based economy.

Advertising is inherently evil as it tries to sell you something you don't need, even if you have no money.  The local Dollarama switched to Kraft Brand dinner and it's 1.75$ even though you can get other brands for like half or a quarter that price.

They recently installed self-checkouts, but I still have to wait in line. The former cashier has been replaced with a teenager who just stands there and says have a nice day at the end. Every business based on money enshittifies in this exact way. They end up making all of their decisions on this same way.

Almost all foods are identical to each other but there is a perverse incentive to brand flavour combinations and textures, so that the product that is the most air water and other fillers (makes the most money for the company) is optimized.

Almost every restaurant I've been in looks to me like it wastes an incredible amount of resources, I can always make the same thing for like a tenth or a hundredth the cost. I feel like I would get shut down by the restaurant industry if I made cooking videos because it would expose the scam. 

Notice I am talking about actual physical products and non-perishable merchandise isn't much better.

But when you're selling "motivation" or "inspiration" you can mark it up a million times, you don't need empirically demonstrate usefulness or effectiveness. Maybe I would change my tune if I had any money and I just did my taxes for last year and found out I made like 9000 dollars last year.

I am pretty sure I spent it all on credit card bills and utilities, leaving me less then nothing for groceries. I literally eat two or three year expired food a lot of the time, and can mostly live off of scraps and leftovers from my roommate or that others choose to give me. Yeah I am sure that I am choosing this exact life because I lack motivation or work ethic.

Yet somehow I am always working, doing manual labor, construction, installation, of pretty much any kind, electrical, plumbing, roofing, whatever and somehow have managed to study programming and other subjects like 8 or 10 hours a day for a couple of decades or more.

The problem is I don't want to buy or sell from anyone who eats meat or purchases from a sweat shop. After like 7 years of being a vegan I had to force myself to eat meat because I think there is some risk of becoming a Rocco's Basilisk or sociopath if I think that nearly everyone else on the planet is a psychopath.

I can't see any way to make money off of this.

Actually I should go in to politics, I think the government needs to refund everyone the money back they took in the form of alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana sales, lotteries, and gambling.

When I was in Cuba a pack of cigarettes was 40 cents and yet I did not feel like smoking. In fact smoking is the only ethical activity I can think of because it keeps from inviting people into my home and I don't need to hang out with meat eaters.

If I leave the house I am bombarded with billboards trying to normalize and incentivize meat eating. I can't see how that is good for anyone's mental health.