6.3 Applications Empowered by Idealization

There is a third approach to the problem of idealization: to some Bayesians, some aspects of the Bayesian idealization are to be utilized rather than removed, because it is those aspects of idealization that empower certain important applications of Bayesian epistemology in science. Here is the idea. Consider a human scientist confronted with an empirical problem. When some hypotheses have been stated for consideration and some data have been collected, there remains an inferential task—the task of inferring from the data to one of the hypotheses. This inferential task can be done by human scientists alone, but it has been done increasingly often this way: by developing a computer program (in Bayesian statistics) to simulate an idealized Bayesian agent as if that agent were hired to perform the inferential task. The purpose of this inferential task would be undermined if what is simulated by the computer were a cognitively underpowered agent who mimics the limited capacities of human agents. Howson (1992: sec. 6) suggests that this inferential task is what Bayesian epistemology and Bayesian statistics were mainly designed for at the early stages of their development. See Fienberg (2006) for the historical development of Bayesian statistics.

So, on the above view, idealization is essential to the existing applications of Bayesian epistemology in science. If so, the real issue is whether the kind of scientific inquiry empowered by Bayesian idealization serves the purpose of the inferential task better than do the non-Bayesian rivals, such as so-called frequentism and likelihoodism in statistics. For a critical comparison of those three schools of thought about statistical inference, see Sober (2008: ch. 1), Hacking (2016), and the entry on philosophy of statistics. For an introduction to both Bayesian statistics and frequentist statistics written for philosophers, see Howson & Urbach (2006: ch. 5–8).

7. Closing: The Expanding Territory of Bayesianism

Bayesian epistemology, despite the problems presented above, has been expanding its scope of application. In addition to the more standard, older areas of application listed in section 1.3, the newer ones can be found in the entry on epistemic self-doubt, sections 5.1 and 5.4 of the entry on disagreement, Adler (2006 [2017]: sec. 6.3), and sections 3.6 and 4 of the entry on social epistemology.

In their more recent works, Bayesians have also started to contribute to some epistemological issues that have traditionally been among the most central concerns for many non-Bayesians, especially for those immersed in the epistemology of all-or-nothing beliefs. I wish to close by giving four groups of examples.

Skeptical Challenges: Central to traditional epistemology is the issue of how to address certain skeptical challenges. The Cartesian skeptic thinks that we are not justified in believing that we are not a brain in a vat. Huemer (2016) and Shogenji (2018) have each developed a Bayesian argument against this variety of skepticism. There is also the Pyrrhonian skeptic, who holds the view that no belief can be justified due to the regress problem of justification: once a belief is justified with a reason, that reason is in need of justification, too, which kickstarts a regress. An attempt to reply to this skeptic quickly leads to a difficult choice among three positions: first, foundationalism (roughly, that the regress can be stopped); second, coherentism (roughly, that it is permissible for the regress of justifications to be circular); and third, infinitism (roughly, that it is permissible for the regress of justifications to extend ad infinitum). To that issue Bayesians have made some contributions. For example, White (2006) develops a Bayesian argument against an influential version of foundationalism, followed by a reply from Weatherson (2007); for more, see section 3.2 of the entry on formal epistemology. Klein & Warfield (1994) develop a probabilistic argument against coherentism, which initiates a debate joined by many Bayesians; for more, see section 7 of the entry on coherentist theories of epistemic justification. Peijnenburg (2007) defends infinitism by developing a Bayesian version of it. For more on the Cartesian and Pyrrhonian skeptical views, see the entry on skepticism.

Theories of Knowledge and Justified Beliefs: While traditional epistemologists praise knowledge and have extensively studied what turns a belief into knowledge, Moss (2013, 2018) develops a Bayesian counterpart: she argues that a credence can also be knowledge-like, a property that can be studied by Bayesians. Traditional epistemology also features a number of competing accounts of justified belief, and the possibilities of their Bayesian counterparts have been explored by Dunn (2015) and Tang (2016). For more on the prospects of such Bayesian counterparts, see Hájek and Lin (2017).

The Scientific Realism/Anti-Realism Debate: One of the most classic debates in philosophy of science is that between scientific realism and anti-realism. The scientific realist contends that science pursues theories are true literally or at least approximately, while the anti-realist denies that. An early contribution to this debate is van Fraassen’s (1989: part II) Bayesian argument against inference to the best explanation (IBE), which is often used by scientific realists to defend their view. Some Bayesians have joined the debate and try to save IBE instead; see sections 3.1 and 4 of the entry on abduction. Another influential defense of scientific realism proceeds with the so-called no-miracle argument. (This argument runs roughly as follows: scientific realism is correct because it is the only philosophical view that does not render the success of science a miracle.) Howson (2000: ch. 3) and Magnus & Callender (2004) maintain that the no-miracle argument commits a fallacy that can be made salient from a Bayesian perspective. In reply, Sprenger & Hartmann (2019: ch. 5) contend that Bayesian epistemology makes possible a better version of the no-miracle argument for scientific realism. An anti-realist view is instrumentalism, which says that science only need to pursue theories that are useful for making observable predictions. Vassend (forthcoming) argues that conditionalization can be generalized in a way that caters to both the scientific realist and the instrumentalist—regardless of whether evidence should be utilized in science to help us pursue truth or usefulness.

Frequentist Concerns: Frequentists about statistical inference design inference procedures for the purposes of, say, testing a working hypothesis, identifying the truth among a set of competing hypotheses, or producing accurate estimates of certain quantities. And they want to design procedures that infer reliably—with a low objective, physical chance of making errors. Those concerns have been incorporated into Bayesian statistics, leading to the Bayesian counterparts of some frequentist accounts. In fact, those results have already appeared in standard textbooks on Bayesian statistics, such as the influential one by Gelman et al. (2014: sec. 4.4 and ch. 6). The line between frequentist and Bayesian statistics is blurring.

So, as can be seen from the many examples in I–IV, Bayesians have been assimilating ideas and concerns from the epistemological tradition of all-or-nothing beliefs. In fact, there have also been attempts to develop a joint epistemology—an epistemology for agents who have both credences and all-or-nothing beliefs at the same time; for details, see section 4.2 of the entry on formal representations of belief.

It is debatable which, if any, of the above topics can be adequately addressed in Bayesian epistemology. But Bayesians have been expanding their territory and their momentum will surely continue.

