Pawel Pachniewski
Yesterday at 1242 PM:
If you think intelligence is magically "good" or aligned, you need to meet a few murdering psychopaths.
o
Intelligence is an instrument. It's capability. It can serve any goal. The universe is not fair. It's certainly not specifically fair to humans
We live a very sheltered life on earth and we're stuck in a subjective bubble.
a
If you think otherwise, you're succumbing to something like the just-world fallacy.
Like
dO lrina Rish and 40 others
Comment
Share
1 share
Brian Wachter
Those are not examples of misaligned intelligence. They're outlying examples of of what happens when you abuse high
intelligence. This is why my approach to alignment is calm and psychological, not fearful and scientific..
on Fri Like Reply More
Duncan Sabien
Pawel why is Brian stalking/trolling your posts this
morning?
on Fri ike Reply More
Martin Utheraptor Duřt
Brian Wachter so how is abuse of capability different from misaligned
capability?
on Fri ik Reply More
Pawel.
Pachniewski
Brian,
semantics.
on Fri Like Reply More
Pawel Pachniewski
Duncan, no idea. I suppose I don't perceive it that way. With these exotic topics and developments in the world, and lots of
exotic ideas in my own head..it's hard to tell who's trolling or not. I try to notice whether someone argues in good faith or
not.
on Fri Like Reply More
Brian Wachter
Pawel Pachniewski not if you think you can program your way out of
misaligned Al.
on Fri ik Reply More
Brian Wachter
Martin Utheraptor Duřt misaligned intelligence is created that way abused intelligence is created
after the fact.
on Fri ike Reply More
Jim Lai
An idealized scientific approach should be dispassionate, not fearful. The fearmongering of Al x-risk tech bros, that is far
from dispassionate, and I suspect that it is a libertarian con to forestall political attention being paid to potential, probable
be
near-term harms that could be averted by regulation. If politicians are steered into focusing on regulating x-risk, there's less
time for them to pay attention to near-term societal impact, which means less regulatory risk to business plans. Capitalism
rewards this type of "jamming" of the political system.
on Fri ik Reply More
Willam Davis
Brian Wachter winning wars and conquering your neighbors isn't abuse of intelligence. It's part of who we are as a species.
We cant get any of this right if we don't correctly understand ourselves
on Fri Like Reply More
Brian Wachter
William Davis not what I was saying, but I totally agree with
you.
on Fri ike Reply More
William Davis
O
Brian Wachter we are typically the most aggressive during times of resource scarcity, and game theory indicates that
in
competition does become more rational than cooperation in certain conditions. A Superintelligence wouldn't need to be
hostile, just a resource hog.
on Fri ike Reply More
Brian Wachter
William Davis
interesting.
Like Reply More
on Fri
William Davis
Brian Wachter starting already?
https://news.ucr.edu/articles/2023/04/28/ai-programs-consume-large-volumes-scarce-water
Al programs consume large volumes of.
news.ucr.edu
on Fri ik ReplyMore